BOLLINGEN SERIES XCIX

A COMPLETE LIST OF THE COLLECTED WORKS OF C. G. JUNG
APPEARS AT THE BACK OF THIS VOLUME

THE PSYCHOLOGY
OF
KUNDALINI YOGA
NOT ES OF THE SEMI NA R
GIVEN IN 1932 BY

C. G. JUNG
EDITED BY SONU SHAMDASANI

BOLLINGEN SERIES XCIX

PRINCETON UNIVERSITY PRESS

COPYRIGHT  1996 BY PRINCETON UNIVERSITY PRESS
PUBLISHED BY PRINCETON UNIVERSITY PRESS, 41 WILLIAM STREET,
PRINCETON, NEW JERSEY 08540
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
SECOND PRINTING, AND FIRST PAPERBACK PRINTING, 1999
PAPERBACK ISBN 0-691-00676-8
THIS EDITION OF THE NOTES OF JUNG’S SEMINARS IS BEING
PUBLISHED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA BY PRINCETON
UNIVERSITY PRESS AND IN ENGLAND BY ROUTLEDGE LTD. IN
THE AMERICAN EDITION, THE VOLUMES OF SEMINAR NOTES
CONSTITUTE NUMBER XCIX IN BOLLINGEN SERIES, SPONSORED
BY BOLLINGEN FOUNDATION
THE TEXT HERE PUBLISHED IS THAT WHICH MARY FOOTE, ITS
ORIGINAL EDITOR, ISSUED PRIVATELY IN 1933
THE LIBRARY OF CONGRESS HAS CATALOGED THE CLOTH EDITION OF
THIS BOOK AS FOLLOWS
JUNG, C. G. (CARL GUSTAV), 1875–1961.
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF KUNDALINI YOGA : NOTES OF THE SEMINAR GIVEN IN 1932
BY C. G. JUNG / EDITED BY SONU SHAMDASANI.
P. CM. — (BOLLINGEN SERIES ; 99)
ISBN 0-691-02127-9 (CL : ALK. PAPER)
1. KUNDALINI—PSYCHOLOGY.
II. TITLE.

I. SHAMDASANI, SONU, 1962– .
III. SERIES.

BL1238.56.K86J86
294.5'43—DC20

1996
95–44198

THIS BOOK HAS BEEN COMPOSED IN BASKERVILLE
THE PAPER USED IN THIS PUBLICATION MEETS THE MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
OF ANSI/NISO Z39.48-1992 (R1997) (PERMANENCE OF PAPER)
HTTP://PUP.PRINCETON.EDU
PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
3

5 7

9 10

8 6

4 2

IN MEMORIAM

Michael Scott Montague Fordham
(1905–1995)

TA B L E O F CO NT E N TS

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
PREFACE
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
MEMBERS OF THE SEMINAR
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
INTRODUCTION: JUNG’S JOURNEY TO THE EAST,
by Sonu Shamdasani

ix
xi
xiii
xiv
xv
xvii

Lecture 1: 12 October 1932
Lecture 2: 19 October 1932
Lecture 3: 26 October 1932
Lecture 4: 2 November 1932
Appendix 1: Indian Parallels, 11 October 1930
Appendix 2: Jung’s Comments in Hauer’s German Lectures,
5–8 October 1932
Appendix 3: Hauer’s English Lecture, 8 October 1932
Appendix 4: ûa°-cakra-nirÖpaõa

79
88
111

INDEX

121

vii

3
23
42
60
71

L I S T O F I L L U S T R AT I O N S

Figure 1. The cakras
Figure 2. Mulvdhvra cakra
Figure 3. Svvdhiü°hvna cakra
Figure 4. MaõipÖra cakra
Figure 5. Anvhata cakra
Figure 6. Viçuddha cakra
Figure 7. ujñv cakra
Figure 8. Sahasrvra cakra

xlvii
xlviii
xlix
l
li
lii
liii
liv

ix

PREFACE

From 3 to 8 October 1932 the Indologist Wilhelm Hauer presented six
lectures concurrently in English and German at the Psychological Club
in Zürich, entitled “Der Yoga, im besondern die Bedeutung des Cakras”
(Yoga, especially the meaning of the cakras). Following these, Jung devoted four lectures to a psychological interpretation of Kundalini yoga.
Hauer’s English lectures, Jung’s English lectures of 12, 19, and 26 October and Jung’s German lecture of 2 November (which was translated
by Cary F. Baynes) were compiled by Mary Foote1 from stenographic
notes taken by her secretary, Emily Köppel, and privately published in
mimeographed form under the title The Kundalini Yoga: Notes on the
Lecture Given by Prof. Dr. J. W. Hauer with Psychological Commentary by
Dr. C. G. Jung (Zurich, 1933). In her editorial preface Foote noted that
the text had been corrected by both Hauer and Jung.
A German edition edited by Linda Fierz and Toni Wolff entitled Bericht über das Lecture von Prof. Dr. J. W. Hauer. 3–8 October (Zurich,
1933), and bearing the title Tantra Yoga on the spine, differed in content
from the English edition. In addition to a German translation of Jung’s
English lectures, it contained the text of Hauer’s German lectures, an
account of Toni Wolff’s lecture “ Tantrische Symbolik bei Goethe” (Tantric symbolism in Goethe) given to the club on 19 March 1932,2 and an
account of Jung’s lecture “ Westliche Parallelen zu den Tantrischen
Symbolen” (Western parallels to tantric symbols) of 7 October 1932.
Jung’s lectures were published in abridged form without annotations
in Spring: Journal of Archetypal Psychology and Jungian Thought (1975 and
1976).
This present unabridged edition is based on the text of Mary Foote’s
first edition. Hauer’s lectures have not been reproduced, with the exception of his final English lecture, which Jung attended and which forms
the bridge to his lectures. This particular lecture demonstrates the relation between Hauer’s and Jung’s approaches. Where Hauer’s exposition
is referred to in Jung’s lectures, the specific context has been supplied in
a footnote.
1 For information on Mary Foote, see Edward Foote, “Who was Mary Foote,” Spring: An
Annual of Archetypal Psychology and Jungian Thought (1974): 256–68.
2 Her lecture, which contained interpretations of Goethe’s work through the symbolism
of Kundalini yoga, was published in full in her Studien zu C. G. Jungs Psychologie (Zurich:
Daimon, 1981), 285–318.

xi

PREFACE
In addition, Jung’s comments in Hauer’s German lectures in the Fierz
and Wolff edition and the résumé of his 1930 lecture “Indian Parallels”
contained in Olga von Koenig-Fachsenfeld’s edition, Bericht über das
Deutsche Seminar von C. G. Jung, 6–11. Oktober 1930 in Küsnacht-Zürich
(Stuttgart, 1931) have been newly translated by Katherina Rowold and
Michael Münchow respectively and included, together with Sir John
Woodroffe’s translation of the ûa°-cakra-nirÖpaõa, the tantric text that
was the subject of Hauer’s and Jung’s commentaries. This has been reproduced from the fifteenth edition of Woodroffe’s The Serpent Power
(Madras, 1992), from which the illustrations of the cakras have also
been reproduced (citations, unless otherwise indicated, are to this edition). For reasons of space, his copious explanatory notes have not been
reproduced.
In editing the transcript, silent changes have been restricted to minor
alterations in punctuation, spelling, and grammar. The Spring edition
has been of assistance in this regard. With few exceptions, the orthography of the Sanskrit terms in the Foote edition has been followed. The
spelling of these terms in the ûa°-cakra-nirÖpaõa and other texts cited has
been maintained in the original form.
SONU SHAMDASANI

xii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I would like to thank Ulrich Hoerni and Peter Jung for their assistance
in a myriad of ways with the preparation of this seminar, and particularly
the former for many helpful suggestions and for his comments on the
manuscript; Franz Jung for kindly enabling me to consult his father’s
library and locating items for me; C. A. Meier and Tadeus Reichstein for
sharing their recollections of the proceedings; Paul Bishop for locating
Tadeus Reichstein; Beat Glaus for assisting the consultation of Jung’s
correspondence; Eric Donner, Michael Münchow, and Katherina Rowold for translations; Natalie Baron for assistance with transcription; Anthony Stadlen for supplying a copy of a letter of John Layard; Ernst
Falzeder and André Haynal for inviting me to lecture at the Department
of Psychiatry at the University of Geneva, which enabled me to undertake research in Switzerland; David Holt for the gift of copies of Jung’s
German-language seminars and lectures at the Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule; William McGuire for his comments on the manuscript; and the late Mary Foote, for her invaluable work transcribing and
editing Jung’s English-language seminars. Finally, I would like to thank
the Erbengemeinschaft C. G. Jung for permission to consult and quote
from Jung’s unpublished manuscripts and correspondence with Wilhelm Hauer and Surendranath Dasgupta.
S.S.

xiii

MEMBERS OF THE SEMINAR

The following list accounts for persons whose names appear in the original multigraphed transcript, and others known to have attended. In the
transcript only surnames are given. Here, the full names together with
the country of residence where possible have been given. The actual attendance was far higher (see p. xxxviii). Biographical details on many of
these individuals have recently been culled together by Paul Bishop.1
Alleman, Mr. Fritz (Switzerland)
Bailward, Mrs.
Baumann, Mr. Hans (Switzerland)
Barker, Dr. Culver (U.K.)
Baynes, Mrs. Cary F. (U.S.)
Bertine, Dr. Eleanor (U.S.)
Crowley, Mrs. Alice Lewisohn (U.S.)
Dell, Mr. Stanley W. (U.S.)
Diebold, Mrs.
Fierz, Mrs. Linda (Switzerland)
Foote, Mary (U.S.)
Hannah, Miss Barbara (U.K.)
Kranefeld, Dr. Wolfgang (Germany)
Mehlich, Mrs. Rose
Meier, Dr. C. A. (Switzerland)
Reichstein, Dr. Tadeus (Switzerland)
Sawyer, Mrs. Carol Fisher (U.S./Switzerland)
Shaw, Dr. Helen (U.K./Australia)
Sigg, Mrs. Martha Böddinghaus (Switzerland)
Spiegelberg, Dr. Friederich (Germany)
Spiegelberg, Mrs. (Germany)
Thiele, Miss
Trüb, Dr. Hans (Switzerland)
Wolff, Miss Antonia (Switzerland)

1 See Paul Bishop, “The Members of Jung’s Seminar on Zarathustra,” Spring: A Journal of
Archetype and Culture 56 (1994): 92–112.

xiv

L I S T O F A B B R E V I AT I O N S

Analytical Psychology = Analytical Psychology: Notes of the Seminar Given in
1925 by C. G. Jung. Edited by William McGuire. Princeton (Bollingen Series XCIX) and London, 1989.
CW = The Collected Works of C. G. Jung. 21 vols. Edited by Sir Herbert
Read, Michael Fordham, and Gerhard Adler; William McGuire, executive editor; translated by R.F.C. Hull. New York and Princeton
(Bollingen Series XX) and London, 1953–83.
ETH = Jung papers, Wissenschaftshistorische Sammlungen, Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule, Zürich.
HS = Wilhelm Hauer, “Yoga, Especially the Meaning of the Cakras.” In
Mary Foote, ed., The Kundalini Yoga: Notes on the Lecture Given by Prof.
Dr. J. W. Hauer with Psychological Commentary by Dr. C. G. Jung. Zürich,
1932.
Interpretation of Visions = C. G. Jung, Interpretation of Visions: Notes of the
Seminar in Analytical Psychology, Autumn 1930–Winter 1934, ed. Mary
Foote. 11 vols. Zürich.
Jung: Letters = C. G. Jung Letters. 2 vols. Selected and edited by Gerhard
Adler in collaboration with Aniela Jaffé; translated by R.F.C. Hull.
Princeton (Bollingen Series XCV) and London, 1973 and 1975.
MDR = C. G. Jung, Memories, Dreams, Reflections. London, 1983.
Modern Psychology 3 and 4 = Modern Psychology. The Process of Individuation. Vols. 3, Eastern Texts. Notes on the Lectures Given at the
Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule, Zürich, by Prof. Dr. C. G. Jung, October 1938–March 1940, and 4, Exercita Spiritualia of St. Ignatius of
Loyola. 2d ed. Zürich, 1959.
Tantra Yoga = Bericht über das Lecture von Prof. Dr. J. W. Hauer. 3–8 October. Edited by Linda Fierz and Toni Wolff. Zürich, 1933.

xv

INTRODUCTION
JUNG’S JOU RN EY TO THE EAST

26 January 1930. Throughout India gatherings took a pledge that began:
We believe that it is the inalienable right of the Indian people, as of
any other people, to have freedom and to enjoy the fruits of their
toil and have the necessities of life, so that they may have full opportunities of growth. We believe also that if any government deprives
a people of these rights and oppresses them, the people have the
further right to alter it or to abolish it. The British Government in
India has not only deprived the Indian people of their freedom but
has based itself on the exploitation of the masses, and has ruined
India economically, politically, culturally, and spiritually. We believe that India must sever the British connection and attain Purna
Swaraj or complete independence.1
Civil disobedience was proclaimed, Gandhi commenced his salt march,
and Nehru was imprisoned.
*
Munich, 30 May. At a memorial for his deceased colleague, the sinologist
Richard Wilhelm, Jung echoed these dramatic events:
If we look to the East: an overwhelming destiny is fulfilling itself. . . .
We have conquered the East politically. Do you know what happened, when Rome subjugated the near East politically? The spirit
of the East entered Rome. Mithras became the Roman military
god. . . . Would it be unthinkable that the same thing happened
today and we would be just as blind as the cultured Romans, who
marvelled at the superstitions of the Christians? . . . I know that
our unconscious is crammed with Eastern symbolism. The spirit
of the East is really ante portas. . . . I consider the fact that Wilhelm
and the Indologist Hauer were invited to lecture on yoga at this
year’s congress of German psychotherapists, as an extremely significant sign of the times.2 Consider what it means, when the
1 In Jawaharlal Nehru, An Autobiography (London, 1989), 612.
2 Hauer spoke on “Der Yoga im Lichte der Psychotherapie” (Yoga in the light of psychotherapy), in Bericht über den V. Allgemeinen Ärztlichen Kongress für Psychotherapie in BadenBaden, 26–29th April, 1930, edited by E. Kretschmer and W. Cimbal (Leipzig, 1930).

xvii

INTRODUCTION
practising doctor, having to deal directly with suffering and therefore susceptible people, establishes contact with an Eastern system
of healing!3
This grand analogy encompassed what Jung saw as the epochal political
and cultural significance of the impact of Eastern thought upon Western
psychology, and set the stage for his encounter with Kundalini yoga.
In the sixties, Jung was adopted as a guru by the new age movement.
Not least among the reasons for this was his role in promoting the study,
aiding the dissemination, and providing modern psychological elucidations of Eastern thought. For journeyers to the East, he was adopted as a
forefather. At the same time, these interests of Jung together with their
appropriation by the counterculture were seen by many as confirmation
of the mystical obscurantism of his psychology.
YOGA AND THE NEW PSYCHOLOGY
The emergence of depth psychology was historically paralleled by the
translation and widespread dissemination of the texts of yoga.4 Both
were topical, exotic novelties. Newly arrived gurus and yogins vied with
psychotherapists over a similar clientele who sought other counsel than
was provided by Western philosophy, religion, and medicine. Hence the
comparison between the two was not to be unexpected (not least by the
potential customers). While a great deal had already been written comparing Eastern and Western thought,5 the advent of the new depth psy3 “Richard Wilhelm: In Memoriam,” in CW, vol. 15, §90; translation modified. Elsewhere
Jung contended that the violence of colonial imperialism presented the West with an imperative to understand Eastern thought: “The European invasion of the East was an act of
violence on a grand scale. It has left us with the duty—noblesse oblige—of understanding
the spirit of the East.” “Commentary on ‘The Secret of the Golden Flower,’ ” in CW, vol. 13,
§84; translation modified. Where indicated, for the sake of literalness and accuracy, I have
modified the translations from the CW. For a prolegomena to the consideration of Hull’s
translations, see my “Reading Jung Backwards? The Correspondence between Michael
Fordham and Richard Hull Concerning ‘The Type Problem in Poetry’ in Jung’s Psychological Types,” Spring: A Journal of Archetype and Culture 55 (1994): 110–27.
4 For an overview of the introduction of yoga in the West, see Georg Feuerstein, “East
Comes West: An Historical Perspective,” in Feuerstein, Sacred Paths (Burdett, N.Y., 1991).
On the introduction of Eastern thought in general, see Eastern Spirituality in America: Selected
Writings, edited by Robert Elwood (New York, 1987). For a model case study, see Peter
Bishop, Dreams of Power: Tibetan Buddhism, the Western Imagination and Depth Psychology (London, 1992).
5 See especially Raymond Schwab’s monumental study The Oriental Renaissance: Europe’s
Rediscovery of India and the East, 1680–1880, translated by G. Patterson-Black and V. Renning (New York, 1984).

xviii

INTRODUCTION
chologies heralded a new and more promising yardstick for comparison.
For the depth psychologies sought to liberate themselves from the stultifying limitations of Western thought to develop maps of inner experience grounded in the transformative potential of therapeutic practices.
A similar alignment of “theory” and “practice” seemed to be embodied
in the yogic texts that moreover had developed independently of the
bindings of Western thought. Further, the initiatory structure adopted
by institutions of psychotherapy brought its social organization into
proximity with that of yoga. Hence an opportunity for a new form of
comparative psychology opened up.
As early as 1912, in Transformation and Symbols of the Libido, Jung provided psychological interpretations of passages in the Upanishads and the
Rig Veda.6 While this opened the possibility of a comparison between the
practice of analysis and that of yoga, possibly the first explicit comparison was made by F. I. Winter in “The Yoga System and Psychoanalysis.”7
He contrasted psychoanalysis, as depicted in the work of Freud and
Jung, with Patanjali’s Yoga Sutras. Before Jung himself took up the subject, his work was already being compared to yoga—and the “new paths
in psychology” that he sought to open up since leaving the auspices of
the International Psychoanalytical Association promised to be the most
fertile crossroads between Eastern and Western approaches.
An account of Jung’s encounter with Eastern thought would be incomplete without mention of Count Hermann Keyserling and his
School of Wisdom at Darmstadt, which provided a collegiate environment for Jung’s explorations. Keyserling dealt with yoga in his The Travel
Diary of a Philosopher, which was a much-acclaimed work. He contended
that the new psychology actually represented a rediscovery of what was
already known by the ancient Indians: “Indian wisdom is the profoundest which exists. . . . The further we get, the more closely do we approach
the views of the Indians. Psychological research confirms, step by step,
the assertions contained . . . within the old Indian science of the soul.”8
6 Gopi Krishna later criticized Jung’s interpretation of a Vedic hymn concerning the producion of fire through the rubbing of sticks in which Jung saw ‘unequivocal coitus symbolism’ (See Psychology of the Unconscious, translated by Beatrice Hinkle, CW, supplement B,
§§243–45), stating that “the terms used clearly point to the fire produced by Kundalini.”
Kundalini for the New Age: Selected Writings of Gopi Krishna, edited by Gene Kieffer (New York,
1988), 67.
7 F. I. Winter, “The Yoga System and Psychoanalysis,” Quest 10 (1918–19): 182–96,
315–35. Jung had a set of this journal from 1910 to 1924 and from 1929 to 1930 in his
library.
8 Count Hermann Keyserling, The Travel Diary of a Philosopher, translated by J. H. Reece
(New York, 1925), 255–56. On Keyserling’s encounter with India, see Anne Marie Bouisson-Maas, Hermann Keyserling et L’Inde (Paris, 1978).

xix

INTRODUCTION
What was distinctive about Keyserling’s approach was that he viewed
yoga as a psychological system superior to any in the West: “The Indians
have done more than anyone else to perfect the method of training
which leads to an enlargement and deepening of consciousness. . . .
Yoga . . . appears entitled to one of the most highest places among the
paths to self-perfection.”9 Several of his characterizations of the difference between the East and the West paralleled those of Jung, such as the
following: “The Indian regards psychic phenomena as fundamental;
these phenomena are more real to him than physical ones.”10
It was at Darmstadt in the early 1920s that Jung met the sinologist
Richard Wilhelm, and their 1928 collaboration over the Chinese alchemical text The Secret of the Golden Flower, which Wilhelm translated into
German and for which Jung wrote a psychological commentary,11 provided Jung with a means to assay the comparative psychology of East and
West. Jung (who did not know Sanskrit) subsequently had similar collaborations with figures such as Heinrich Zimmer, Walter Evans-Wentz,
Daisetz Suzuki, and in this instance Wilhelm Hauer, who represented
the leading commentators on Eastern thought in Jung’s day.12
The comparison between yoga and psychoanalysis was further explored by Keyserling’s associate Oskar Schmitz in Psychoanalyse und
Yoga,13 which Schmitz dedicated to Keyserling. Schmitz claimed that of
the schools of psychoanalysis it was Jung’s rather than Freud’s or Adler’s
that lay closest to yoga: “With the Jungian system for the first time the
possibility enters that psychoanalysis can contribute to human higher de9 Keyserling, The Travel Diary of a Philosopher, 124–25.
10 Ibid., 95. Cf. Jung: “The East bases itself upon psychic reality, that is, upon the psyche
as the main and unique condition of existence.” “Psychological Commentary on ‘The Tibetan Book of the Great Liberation,’ ” in CW, vol. 11, §770. ( Jung’s commentary was written
in 1939 and first published in 1954). Such characterizations follow a long line of orientalist
speculations in which Indian thought was characterized as dreamlike (Hegel) or as being
dominated by imagination (Schlegel). See Ronald Inden, Imagining India (London, 1990),
93–97.
11 Jung, CW, vol. 13.
12 This period of scholarship is increasingly coming in for reappraisal. See Heinrich
Zimmer: Coming into His Own, edited by Margaret Case (Princeton, 1994), and A Zen Life:
D. T. Suzuki Remembered, edited by Masao Abe (New York, 1986). Expressions of reciprocal admiration between Jung and his colleagues were frequent. For example, on receiving his commentary to the The Tibetan Book of the Great Liberation, Evans-Wentz wrote
to Jung that it was an honor to be able to include a contribution from “the foremost
authority in the West on the Science of the Mind” (Evans-Wentz to Jung, 13 July 1939,
ETH).
13 Oskar Schmitz, Psychoanalyse und Yoga (Darmstadt, 1923).

xx

INTRODUCTION
velopment. . . . It is not a method of yoga, and does not even want to be
one, but possibly Jung’s system is such.”14 Jung’s response to Schmitz’s
work was equivocal:
Inasmuch as I regard the psychoanalytical and psychosynthetic
methods likewise as means of self-improvement, your comparison
with the yoga method seems thoroughly plausible to me. It appears
to me, however, as one must emphasize, that it is merely an analogy
which is involved, since nowadays far too many Europeans are inclined to carry Eastern ideas and methods over unexamined into
our occidental mentality. This happens, in my opinion, neither to
our advantage nor to the advantage of those ideas. For what has
emerged from the Eastern spirit is based upon the peculiar history
of that mentality, which is most fundamentally different from
ours.15
TANTRISM AND KUNDALINI YOGA
The omnipresence of yoga classes alongside aerobics, weight training,
massage, and other sects of the contemporary body cults at sports and
fitness centers makes it easy to forget that yoga is an ancient spiritual
discipline.
Yoga partakes of two notions generally held in common in Indian philosophy and religion—reincarnation, and the quest for emancipation
from the cycle of birth, death, and rebirth. Mircea Eliade stated that for
yoga and Svôkhya philosophy to which it is related, in contrast to other
Indian schools of thought, “the world is real (not illusory—as it is, for
example, for Vedvnta). Nevertheless, if the world exists and endures, it is
because of the ‘ignorance’ of spirit.”16 What distinguishes yoga is its essentially practical cast. Surendranath Dasgupta noted: “The yoga philosophy has essentially a practical tone and its object consists mainly in
demonstrating the means of attaining salvation, oneness, the liberation
of purusha.”17 Many different definitions and accounts of yoga have
14 Ibid., 65, translated by Eric Donner.
15 Jung to Schmitz, 26 May 1923, “C. G. Jung: Letters to Oskar Schmitz, 1921–31,” Psychological Perspectives 6 (1975): 81; translation modified.
16 Mircea Eliade, Yoga: Immortality and Freedom, translated by Willard R. Trask (Bollingen
Series LVI; reprint, London, 1989), 9.
17 Surendranath Dasgupta, Yoga as Philosophy and Religion (London, 1924), 124. On
the translation of puruüa, which is often rendered as “self,” see lecture 2, nn. 11 and 12.
Jung met Dasgupta when he was in Calcutta in 1938 ( Jung to Dasgupta, 2 February 1939,

xxi

INTRODUCTION
been given. Eliade stated: “Etymologically, yoga derives from the root yuj,
‘to bind together,’ ‘hold fast,’ ‘yoke.’ . . . The word yoga serves, in general, to designate any ascetic technique and any method of meditation.”18 For
Feuerstein, “Yoga is a specifically Indian tradition consisting of sets of
varyingly codified and/or systematized ideas, attitudes, methods and
techniques primarily intended to induce a transformation in the practitioner (yogin) and transmitted from one teacher to one or more disciples
in a more or less formal setting.”19 The earliest traces of yoga have been
traced to the third millennium B.C.20 There are several main schools of
yoga: Raja yoga, Hatha yoga, Jnana yoga, Bhakti yoga, Karma yoga, Mantra yoga, Laya yoga, and Kundalini yoga. To characterize the latter, it is
useful to consider several general features of the tantric movement.
Tantrism was a religious and philosophical movement that became
popular from the fourth century onward and influenced Indian philosophy, mysticism, ethics, art, and literature. Agehananda Bharati stated,
“What distinguishes tantric from other Hindu and Buddhist teaching is
its systematic emphasis on the identity of the absolute [paramvrtha] and
the phenomenal [vyavahvra] world when filtered through the experience of worship [svdhanv].”21 Tantrism was anti-ascetic and anti-speculative, and represented a transgressive countercurrent to mainstream
Hinduism. It rejected the prevalent caste system and represented a
transvaluation of values. In tantrism there was a celebration of the body,
which was seen as the microcosm of the universe. In contrast to the masculinist cast of traditional Hinduism, Eliade noted that in tantrism, “for
the first time in the spiritual history of Aryan India, the Great Goddess
acquires a predominant position. . . . We also recognize a sort of reliETH). The following year Jung invited Dasgupta to lecture in Zurich: “We should be much
obliged if you would give us a talk about the relation of mind and body according to yoga
in your Saturday lecture at the Psychol. Club. As a theme for the lecture at the Polytechnicum I would propose Psychology or Philosophy of Yoga (specially Patanjali Yoga Sutra).”
( Jung to Dasgupta, 17 April 1939, ETH). Dasgupta lectured to the Psychological Club in
May.
18 Eliade, Yoga: Immortality and Freedom, 4.
19 Feuerstein, The Yoga-Sutra of Patanjali: An Exercise in the Methodology of Textual Analysis
(London, 1979), 1.
20 Vivian Worthington, A History of Yoga (London, 1989), 11.
21 Agehananda Bharati, The Tantric Tradition (London, 1992), 18. Narendra Nath Bhattacharyya noted that “although Tantra in its earlier stage opposed the Vedantic philosophy
of illusion and admitted the reality of the world . . . [later] superimposed elements brought
it into line with Vedanta.” History of the Tantric Religion: A Historical, Ritualistic and Philosophical Study (New Delhi, 1982), 14.

xxii

INTRODUCTION
gious rediscovery of the mystery of woman.”22 The different outlook of
tantrism was reflected in its practice, which often utilized elements absent from traditional religious rituals. Zimmer stated that tantrism “insists on the holiness and purity of all things; hence, the ‘five forbidden
things’ . . . constitute the substance of the sacramental fare in certain
tantric rites: wine, meat, fish, parched grain, and sexual intercourse.”23
In what are known as the “right-handed” schools these are used in rituals
symbolically, whereas in the “left-handed” schools they are used literally.
Apropos the contemporary perception of tantrism Jacob Needleman
aptly noted that “the moment one hears the word ‘tantrism,’ various wild
and lurid associations spring forth in the Western mind which add up to
a pastiche of psychospiritual science fiction and sexual acrobatics that
would put to shame even the most imaginative of our contemporary pornographers and quite eclipse the achievements of our hardiest erotic
warriors.”24 The intersection of the new age movement and the sexual
revolution in the sixties led to increasing interest in tantrism in the West
accompanied by numerous “how to do it” manuals that focused on its
ritualized sexual practices—often glossed in the process was that in tantrism, such practices were directed not toward the liberation of sexuality
per se but toward liberation from the cycle of rebirth.
Jung specified his psychological understanding of tantric yoga as
follows:
Indian philosophy is namely the interpretation given to the precise
condition of the non-ego, which affects our personal psychology,
however independent from us it remains. It sees the aim of human
development as bringing about an approach to and connection between the specific nature of the non-ego and the conscious ego.
Tantra yoga then gives a representation of the condition and the
developmental phases of this impersonality, as it itself in its own way
produces the light of a higher suprapersonal consciousness.25
At a time when psychology was characterized by the reign of behavior22 Eliade, Yoga: Immortality and Freedom, 202. For a reevaluation of the role of women
in tantrism, see Miranda Shaw, Passionate Enlightenment: Women in Tantric Buddhism (Princeton, 1994).
23 Heinrich Zimmer, Philosophies of India, edited by Joseph Campbell (London, Bollingen
Series XXVI, 1953), 572.
24 Jacob Needleman, “Tibet in America,” in Needleman, The New Religions (London,
1972), 177.
25 Résumé of Jung’s lecture “Indische Parallelen” (Indian parallels), 7 October 1931, in
Bericht über das Deutsche Seminar von Dr. C. G. Jung, 5–10. Oktober in Küsnacht-Zürich, edited

xxiii

INTRODUCTION
ism, the positivist experimental epistemology, and the growing dominance of psychoanalysis, and when developmental phases could hardly
be associated with anything other than what was becoming the alpha and
omega of the study of personality—the child—Kundalini yoga presented
Jung with a model of something that was almost completely lacking in
Western psychology—an account of the developmental phases of higher
consciousness.
In Kundalini yoga the body is represented as consisting in a series of
cakras: mulvdhvra, svvdhiü°hvna, maõipÖra, anvhata, viçuddha, vjñv,
and sahasrvra. These are located in different parts of the body and
linked by channels (nvìzs), the most important of which are the iìv,
piõgalv, and suüumõv. Most commentators concur that the cakras and
the nvìzs are not intended as physiological depictions of the body in the
contemporary Western sense but represent a subtle or mystical body.
Feuerstein described them as “idealized version of the structure of the
subtle body, which are meant to guide the yogin’s visualisation and
contemplation.”26
Jung’s lectures are principally taken up with providing a modern psychological interpretation of the cakras. Narendra Nath Bhattacharyya
stated that the cakras are best understood through seeing their different
components as constituted by a process of historical layering:
From a historical point of view it may be suggested that the padmas
or cakras were originally conceived of in terms of human anatomy
for the purpose of physiological study. . . . At a subsequent stage, in
conformity with the tantric idea that the human body is the microcosm of the universe, worldly objects such as the sun, moon, mountains, rivers, etc., were connected with these cakras. Each cakra was
again thought to represent the gross and the subtle elements . . .
quite in accordance with the tantric idea that the deities reside
within the human body and that the aspirant has to feel the deity
within the body itself. These cakras came to be conceived of as the
seat of the male and female principles, symbolized by the male and
female organs. . . . The presiding deities of the cakras were originally tantric goddesses. . . . The theory of letters, of the alphabet
symbolising different tattvas was also grafted, and in this way we
by Olga von Koenig-Fachsenfeld (Stuttgart, 1932), 66–67; my translation. On the relation
of this lecture to the lecture of the same title in the appendix to this volume, see
xxxiv.
26 Feuerstein, Yoga: The Technology of Ecstasy (Wellingborough, 1990), 258.

xxiv

INTRODUCTION
come across the functioning of a very elaborate and complicated
process which the cakras are supposed to represent in their qualitatively transformed capacity.27
The Kundalini is represented in the form of a serpent coiled around the
spine that lies sleeping in mulvdhvra, the lowest cakra. Feuerstein defined the Kundalini as “a microcosmic manifestation of the primordial
Energy, or Shakti. It is the Universal Power as it is connected with the
finite body-mind.”28 The object is to awaken Kundalini through ritual
practices and to enable her ascent up the suüumõv nvìz through the
cakra system. When it reaches the topmost cakra the blissful union of
åiva and åakti occurs. This leads to a far-reaching transformation of the
personality.29

JUNG’S ENCOUNTER WITH YOGA
In Memories, Dreams, Reflections, Jung recounted how during his “confrontation with the unconscious” around the time of the First World War, “I
was frequently so wrought up that I had to eliminate the emotions
through yoga practices. But since it was my purpose to learn what was
going on within myself, I would do them only until I had calmed myself
and could take up again the work with the unconscious.”30
In Hauer’s last English lecture (see appendix 3), Jung gave an account
of how his interest in Kundalini was awakened through an encounter
with a European woman brought up in the East who presented dreams
and fantasies that he could not understand until he came across Sir John
27 Bhattacharyya, History of the Tantric Religion, 324–25.
28 Feuerstein, Yoga: The Technology of Ecstasy, 264.
29 For a fascinating firsthand account of the awakening of the Kundalini accompanied by
a lucid psychological commentary, see Gopi Krishna, Kundalini: The Evolutionary Energy in
Man, with a psychological commentary by James Hillman (London, 1970). For a comprehensive guide to the practice of Kundalini yoga, see Swami Satyananda Saraswati, Kundalini
Tantra (Bihar, 1993).
30 Jung, MDR, 201; translation modified. It is not known what specific practices Jung
utilized. However, Fowler McCormick, recalling an analytical interview with Jung in 1937,
spoke of Jung’s recommendation of a procedure not without similarities to the çavvsana
asana of Hatha yoga: “Dr. Jung said that under periods of great stress the one thing which
was useful was to lie down flat on a couch or a bed and just lie quietly there and breathe
quietly with the sense that . . . the wind of disturbance blew over one.” Fowler McCormick
interview, Jung Oral History Archive, Countway Library of Medicine, Harvard Medical
School, 17.

xxv

INTRODUCTION
Woodroffe’s The Serpent Power,31 which consisted of translations of the
ûa°-cakra-nirÖpaõa and the Pvdukv-pañcaka, together with extensive commentaries.32
Woodroffe was primarily responsible for making the tantric texts
known in the West through his translations and commentaries.33 He
stated: “All the world (I speak of course of those interested in such subjects) is beginning to speak of Kundalinî Shakti.”34 This was in no small
part due to his sympathetic treatment of a subject that had been treated
with derision. He described his intention as follows: “We, who are foreigners, must place ourselves in the skin of the Hindu, and must look at
their doctrine and ritual through their eyes and not our own.”35
Jung claimed that the symbolism of Kundalini yoga suggested that the
bizarre symptomatology that patients at times presented actually resulted from the awakening of the Kundalini. He argued that knowledge
of such symbolism enabled much that would otherwise be seen as the
meaningless by-products of a disease process to be understood as meaningful symbolic processes, and explicated the often peculiar physical
localizations of symptoms.36 With the hegemony of the biochemical ap31 Arthur Avalon (pseud. Sir John Woodroffe), The Serpent Power (London, 1919). The
copy in Jung’s library is the first edition and contains many marginal annotations.
Woodroffe was born in 1865. He studied at Oxford and became a barrister. He was an
advocate at the Calcutta high court and a fellow and Tagore law professor at the University
of Calcutta. From 1904–22, he was on the standing council for the Government of India
and Puisne judge of the high court of Calcutta. He was knighted in 1915, and returned to
become a reader in Indian law at Oxford from 1923 to 1930. He died in 1936. (From Who
Was Who, 1929–1940 [London, 1941], 1485.) No evidence has emerged that he had any
direct contact with Jung.
32 The ûa°-cakra-nirÖpaõa (Description of the six centers) was the sixth chapter of
Purõanvnda-Svvmz’s åri-tattva-cintvmaõz, composed in 1577.
33 Heinrich Zimmer recalled: “The values of the Hindu tradition were disclosed to me
through the enormous life-work of Sir John Woodroffe, alias Arthur Avalon, a pioneer and
a classic author in Indic studies, second to none, who, for the first time, by many publications and books made available the extensive and complex treasure of late Hindu tradition: the Tantras, a period as grand and rich as the Vedas, the Epic, Puranâs, etc.; the latest
crystallisation of Indian wisdom, the indispensable closing link of a chain, affording keys
to countless problems in the history of Buddhism and Hinduism, in mythology and
symbolism.” “Some Biographical Remarks about Henry R. Zimmer,” Artistic Form and Yoga
in the Sacred Images of India, translated by G. Chapple and J. Lawson (Princeton, 1984),
254.
34 Ibid., 639.
35 John Woodroffe, Shakti and Shâkta: Essays and Addresses on the Shâkta Tantrashâstra, 3d
ed. (London, 1929), x. Jung had a copy of this book in his library.
36 On the bearing of Kundalini yoga to the question of the localization of consciousness,
see C. A. Meier, The Psychology of Jung, vol. 3.: Consciousness, translated by D. Roscoe (Boston,
1989), chap. 4, “The Localization of Consciousness,” 47–64.

xxvi

INTRODUCTION
proach to so-called mental disorders and the rise of an endless succession of “wonder” drugs such as Prozac, Jung’s insistence on the psychogenic and symbolic significance of such states is even more timely now
than then. As R. D. Laing stated in this regard, “It was Jung who broke
the ground here, but few have followed him.”37
Jung’s published writings specifically on Indian religion consisted of
two essays, “Yoga and the West” (1936) and “The Psychology of Eastern
Meditation” (1948), together with a foreword to Zimmer’s 1944 Der Weg
zum Selbst (The way to the self), which Jung edited.38 His most extensive
work on these topics was presented in his seminars—commencing with
the “Western Parallels” seminars in 1930 (see appendix 1), 1931, and
1932 and the Kundalini seminars in 1932, and culminating in his commentaries on Patanjali’s Yoga Sutras, the Amitvyur-Dhyvna-SÖtra and the
Shrichakrasambhara in 1938–39 at the Eidgenössische Technische
Hochschule in Zurich.39 Given the format, Jung’s statements in this seminar must be taken provisionally, as constituting work in progress.
In 1937 he was invited by the British Government to take part in the
twenty-fifth anniversary celebrations at the University of Calcutta the following year. Jung took the opportunity to travel in India for three
months, during which time he received honorary doctorates from the
Universities of Allahabad, Benares, and Calcutta.40 On his return he
37 R. D. Laing, The Politics of Experience and the Birds of Paradise (London, 1985), 137.
Jung’s view that so-called pathological experiences may in actuality be misrecognized experiences of the arousal of Kundalini is confirmed and developed by Lee Sannella, The Kundalini Experience: Psychosis or Transcendence? (Lower Lake, Calif., 1992).
38 Jung, CW, vol. 11. In addition, an interview of Jung by Shin’ichi Hisamatsu in 1958 was
published under the title “Gespräch mit einem Zen-Meister” (Conversation with a Zen master), edited by Robert Hinshaw and Lela Fischli, in C. G. Jung im Gespräch: Interviews, Reden,
Begegnungen (Zurich, 1986).
39 Modern Psychology 3. In 1933 Jung gave a series of seminars in Berlin on the subject of
dream analysis, in which the contrast between Eastern and Western thought played a certain role, and in which Zimmer presented a talk on the psychology of yoga (Bericht über das
Berliner Seminar von Dr. C. G. Jung vom 26. Juni bis 1. Juli 1933 [Berlin, 1933]). In addition,
from 1933 to 1937, the Eranos conferences, where Jung presented major studies on the
archetypes, the process of individuation, and alchemy, were focused on the contrast between Eastern and Western thought: “Yoga and Meditation in the East and the West”
(1933), “Symbolism and Spiritual Guidance in the East and the West” (1934 and 1935),
“The Shaping of the Idea of Redemption in the East and the West” (1936 and 1937), and
such contrasts continued to play an important role in the following years. Recently recovered notes of the original German wording of Jung’s Eidgenössische Technische
Hochschule seminars are under examination, and a definitive text is being prepared for
publication.
40 The deputy registrar of Benares Hindu University wrote to Henri Ellenberger on 28
March 1967 that “Professor C. G. Jung was awarded D. Litt (Doctor of Letters) Honoris
Causa on 20th December 1937 by this University.” The registrar of the University of Cal-

xxvii

INTRODUCTION
wrote his impressions in two articles: “The Dreamlike World of India”
and “What India Can Teach Us.”41 Fowler McCormick, who accompanied Jung on this trip, recalled an experience of Jung’s that had tantric
overtones:
As we would go through temples of Kali, which were numerous at
almost every Hindu city, we saw the evidences of animal sacrifice:
the places were filthy dirty—dried blood on the floor and lots of
remains of red betelnut all around, so that the colour red was associated with destructiveness. Concurrently in Calcutta Jung began to
have a series of dreams in which the colour red was stressed. It
wasn’t long before dysentery overcame Dr. Jung and I had to take
him to the English hospital at Calcutta. . . . A more lasting effect
of this impression of the destructiveness of Kali was the emotional
foundation it gave him for the conviction that evil was not a negative thing but a positive thing. . . . The influence of that experience in India, to my mind, was very great on Jung in his later
years.42
In “Yoga and the West” Jung delimited his brief as follows:
I will be silent on the meaning of yoga for India, because I cannot presume to pass judgment on something I do not know from
personal experience. I can, however, say something about what
it means for the West. Our lack of direction borders on psychic
anarchy. Therefore any religious or philosophical practice amounts
to a psychological discipline, and therefore a method of psychic hygiene.43
cutta wrote to Ellenberger on 10 May 1967 that “the degree of Doctor of Law (Honoris
Causa) was conferred upon Dr. Charles Gustave Jung in absentia by this University at
a special Convocation held on 7th January, 1938. . . . Dr. Jung could not be present at
the convocation owing to indisposition.” Ellenberger archives, Hôpital Sainte-Anne,
Paris.
41 Jung, CW, vol. 12 (1939). A further account of Jung’s time in India is found in MDR,
304–14. Jung frequently related anecdotes of his experiences there in his seminars and
letters. He subsequently maintained correspondences with many of the individuals he met
there.
42 Fowler McCormick interview, Jung Oral History Archive, Countway Library of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 25–26.
43 Jung, “Yoga and the West,” in CW, vol. 11, §866; translation modified. After his trip to
India, however, Jung became less circumspect in this regard: “Tantric yoga is in rather bad
repute in India; it is criticised because it is connected with the body, particularly with sex,”
Modern Psychology 3, 42; and “Yoga is mainly found in India now as a business proposition
and woe to us when it reaches Europe,” ibid., 69.

xxviii

INTRODUCTION
Thus Jung’s interest, in contrast with Dasgupta’s, were with yoga not as
“philosophy and religion” but as psychology. Hence his definition of
yoga was a psychological one: “Yoga was originally a natural process of
introversion. . . . Such introversions lead to characteristic inner processes of personality changes. In the course of several thousand years
these introversions became gradually organized as methods, and along
widely differing ways.”44 Jung’s concern was not primarily with the canonical and organized methods and teachings of yoga but with the putative natural processes of introversion that originally underlay them. This
perspective legitimized the liberties that he took with the former in the
seminar that follows. Jung saw the inner processes to which yoga gave
rise as universal, and the particular methods employed to achieve them
as culturally specific.45 For Jung, yoga represented a rich storehouse of
symbolic depictions of inner experience and of the individuation process in particular. He claimed that “important parallels with yoga [and
analytical psychology] have come to light, especially with Kundalini yoga
and the symbolism of tantric yoga, Lamaism, and Taoistic yoga in China.
These forms of yoga with their rich symbolism afford me invaluable comparative material for the interpretation of the collective unconscious.”46
Jung’s aim was to develop a cross-cultural comparative psychology of
inner experience. Hence he was concerned to differentiate his approach
from indigenous Eastern understandings, as represented in the missionary efforts of the Ramakrishna movement and such advocates as Romain Rolland,47 the Western appropriation of Eastern teachings, such as
by the theosophists, Hauer’s historico-existential approach, and the
spiritual valorization of Eastern thought by Keyserling’s School of Wisdom, and contrastingly to demonstrate the specificity of a psychological
viewpoint.
Throughout his writings on Eastern thought, while Jung promoted
44 Jung, “Yoga and the West,” §873; translation modified.
45 On reading Gopi Krishna’s account of his experiences, the Jungian analyst John
Layard noted that his descriptions of the awakening of the Kundalini “correspond so
closely to what I have referred to as my ‘feinting experiences,’ with similar noises & sensations, which were truly terrifying, & mixed up also with highly mystical ones, also of course
Psychosexual, that I’m wondering whether something of the same kind may have been
happening to me—The devilish outcome of an almost divine experience. We in the West
are so lacking in the true religiosity that we have lost the threads, & get good things so
muddled up with bad, that we have lost the purity of divine dirt!” ( John Layard to Anthony
Stadlen, 17 October 1968; personal possession of Anthony Stadlen.)
46 Jung, “Yoga and the West,” §875; translation modified.
47 Romain Rolland, Prophets of the New India, translated by Malcolm Smith (London,
1930).

xxix

INTRODUCTION
and endorsed their study he cautioned against their practice by Westerners: “There are many different kinds of yoga and Europeans often become hypnotized by it, but it is essentially Eastern, no European has the
necessary patience and it is not right for him. . . . The more we study
yoga, the more we realize how far it is from us; a European can only
imitate it and what he acquires by this is of no real interest.”48 For Jung
the danger was one of mimetic madness: “The European who practices
yoga does not know what he is doing. It has a bad effect upon him,
sooner or later he gets afraid and sometimes it even leads him over the
edge of madness.”49 This led him to conclude that “in the course of the
centuries the West will produce its own yoga, and it will be on the basis
laid down by Christianity.”50
With the mushrooming of yoga and meditational practices in the
West, such statements have come in for a great deal of criticism. However, such cautions are frequently found in the works of writers on yoga
contemporary to Jung both in the East and in the West. Thus Dasgupta
wrote:
If anyone wishes methodically to pursue a course which may lead
him ultimately to the goal aimed at by yoga, he must devote his
entire life to it under the strict practical guidance of an advanced
teacher. The present work can in no sense be considered as a practical guide for such purposes. . . . The philosophical, psychological,
cosmological, ethical, and religious doctrines . . . are extremely interesting in themselves, and have a definitely assured place in the
history of the progress of human thought.51
Likewise, Eliade wrote:
We have no intention of inviting Western scholars to practice yoga
(which, by the way, is not so easy as some amateurs are wont to
suggest) or of proposing that the various Western disciplines practice yogic methods or adopt the yogic ideology. Another point
of view seems to us far more fertile—to study, as attentively as
possible, the results obtained by such means of exploring the
psyche.52
48 Jung, Modern Psychology 3, 17.
49 Ibid., 71.
50 Jung, “Yoga and the West,” in CW, vol. 11, §876.
51 Dasgupta, Yoga as Philosophy and Religion, vii.
52 Eliade, Yoga: Immortality and Freedom, xvii.

xxx

INTRODUCTION
Keyserling was also critical of the adoption of yoga practices in the West:
It is very significant that the Indian breathing exercises, which have
been popularized by Swami Vivekananda through his lectures in
America, have not helped a single American to a higher condition,
but, on the other hand, are reported to have brought all the more
into hospitals and lunatic asylums. . . . It has not been proved, even
of the most harmless exercises, . . . that they are appropriate to the
organism of the European.53
Jung’s conclusion that something analogous to yoga would arise on the
basis of Christianity was also close to Keyserling’s view on the Christian
basis of Western psychology:
The Indian concepts are alien to us Westerners; most people are
incapable—it is just the theosophists who prove this—of acquiring
an inner relation to them. Moreover, physiologically we are all
Christians, whether our consciousness recognizes this or not. Thus
every doctrine which continues in the Christian spirit has a better
chance of taking hold of our innermost being than the profoundest
doctrine of foreign origin.54

W I L H E L M H A U E R 55
Wilhelm Hauer was born in Württemberg in 1881, six years after Jung.
He had a Protestant theological education and was sent in 1906 by the
Basel Mission to India. Like Richard Wilhelm, Hauer was more impressed by the spirituality he met than by that which he brought with
him. He later recalled:
53 Keyserling, The Travel Diary of a Philosopher, 276. Swami Vivekânanda’s address at the
World’s Congress of Religions in Chicago in 1893 made a great impact, and together with
his subsequent lectures, did much to promote interest in Indian thought. His lectures were
published as Yoga Philosophy: Lectures Delivered in New York, Winter of 1895–96 by the Swâmi
Vivekânanda on Râja Yoga, or Conquering the Internal Nature, 5th ed. (New York, 1899). See
also Eugene Taylor, “Swami Vivekânanda and William James,” Prabuddha Bharata 91
(1986): 374–85. Jung had copies of several of Vivekânanda’s works in his library.
54 Ibid., 165.
55 Information concerning Hauer has been drawn from his own works and from the
comprehensive biography by Margerete Dierks (which includes a full bibliography of
Hauer’s writings), Jakob Wilhelm Hauer, 1881–1962 (Heidelberg, 1986).

xxxi

INTRODUCTION
My five years’ experience in India has widened and deepened my
religious views in a way I had never expected. I went to India as a
missionary in the ordinary sense, but I came back from India a
missionary in a different sense. I learned that we have only the
right to state, to testify to what is in us, and not expect others to
be converted to our point of view, much less to try to convert
them.56
Together with his pastorate, Hauer undertook studies in comparative
religion. This included a spell at the University of Oxford. In 1921 he
abandoned the former and took up a post as a university lecturer at
Tübingen. In 1927 he became a professor of Indian studies and comparative religion and published widely on these topics. It was Hauer’s
talk “Der Yoga im Lichte der Psychotherapie” (Yoga in the light of psychotherapy) that drew the attention of Jung. Hauer commenced by
stating:
I know possibly enough about it to recognize that yoga, seen as a
whole, is a striking parallel to Western psychotherapy (although
fundamental differences lie there) but—this I noticed soon—I lack
the detailed knowledge and, above all, the crucial experiment to
compare the individual parts of yoga with the different orientations
of Western psychotherapy with its special methods.57
In the remainder of his talk he gave a factual account of yoga and left the
comparison between the two to his audience. Hauer presented himself
as an Indologist seeking psychotherapists with whom he could have a
dialogue concerning the similarities and differences between yoga and
psychotherapy. It was Jung who took up the invitation.
Opinions concerning Hauer vary considerably among scholars. Zimmer recalled:
My personal contact with Jung started in 1932. At that time, another
Indic scholar, most unreliable as a scholar and as a character as well,
but endowed with a demoniac, erratic vitality made up of primitive
resistances and ambitions, drew the attention of doctor-psychiatristpsychologists to the subject of yoga. Now, after his long collaboration with Richard Wilhelm on Chinese wisdom, Jung was ready to
56 The World’s Religions against War. The Proceedings of the Preliminary Conference Held at Geneva, September 1928, to Make Arrangements for a Universal Religious Peace Conference (New
York, 1928), 60.
57 Hauer, “Der Yoga im Lichte der Psychotherapie,” 1; my translation.

xxxii

INTRODUCTION
take over similar stuff from Indic scholars. Hauer had a seminary
[sic] on Kundaliniyoga at Zuerich, and I introduced myself at this
forum with a lecture on the types of yoga in Indian tradition, in the
spring of 1932.58
By contrast, Feuerstein stated that “J. W. Hauer . . . to whom we owe a
great deal in the study of yoga and Samkhya . . . not only possessed a rich
knowledge of Indian thought, but was also well acquainted with Western
culture. . . The central theme of all his works is man as a religious being,
and Hauer himself was a sincere god-seeker and mystic.”59 C. A. Meier
described Hauer as a “typically dry German scientist,” “an excellent Sanskritist,” and a “very nice chap.”60

THE GENESIS OF THE KUNDALINI SEMINARS
According to Barbara Hannah,
It was in the autumn of 1932 that the Indologue, J. W. Hauer, at that
time a professor of his subject in Tübingen, came to Zurich to give
us a seminar on Kundalini yoga. This was a thrillingly interesting
parallel to the process of individuation, but, as always happens when
a perfected Indian philosophy is placed before a European audience, we all got terribly out of ourselves and confused. We were
used to the unconscious taking us into this process very gradually,
every dream revealing a little more of the process, but the East has
been working at such meditation techniques for many centuries and
has therefore collected far more symbols than we were able to digest. Moreover, the East is too far above everyday reality for us, aiming at Nirvana instead of at our present, three-dimensional life. Jung
was confronted with a very disorientated group who had greatly appreciated but been unable to digest Hauer’s brilliant exposition of
Kundalini yoga. When this was over, therefore, Jung devoted the
first three lectures of his English seminar to a psychological com58 Zimmer, “Some Biographical Remarks about Henry R. Zimmer,” in Artistic Form and
Yoga in the Sacred Images of India, 259–60. Zimmer’s lecture, “Einige Aspekte des Yoga”
(Some aspects of yoga) took place on 18 June 1932 and preceded the Kundalini seminars.
59 Feuerstein, “The Essence of Yoga,” in A Reappraisal of Yoga: Essays in Indian Philosophy,
edited by G. Feuerstein and J. Miller (London, 1971), 6.
60 Interview with the editor, 30 June 1994.

xxxiii

INTRODUCTION
mentary on Hauer’s lectures which got us all back—the richer for
the experiences—into ourselves.61
Hannah gives the impression that Jung’s seminar was a spontaneous improvisation to therapeutically counsel his disoriented auditors. This account has been uncritically followed by subsequent commentators.62 By
contrast, Meier, who was also present, stated that while Hannah might
have found Hauer’s seminars confusing he found them perfectly clear,
and added that there was no general confusion.63 He also stated that
Jung’s psychological commentary was from the outset part of a planned
collaboration. Hauer, as the specialist, was to present a scholarly philological and historical account to provide the root support for Jung’s psychological interpretation.64
Further evidence that Jung’s seminar was by no means simply a spontaneous improvisation is given by the fact that in both 1930 and 1931 he
presented lectures on Kundalini yoga and the symbolism of the cakras.65
The first of these appears to be Jung’s first public presentation of the
subject (see appendix 1). As the second largely reduplicates this, it has
not been included in this volume. There also exists a series of undated
manuscripts of Jung’s which demonstrate the careful preparation that
he put into his seminars.66 Jung was lecturing on the topic of Kundalini
yoga and giving symbolic interpretations of the cakras before his collabo61 Barbara Hannah, Jung: His Life and Work: A Biographical Memoir (New York and London, 1976), 206. For general background to Jung’s seminars, see William McGuire’s introduction to Dream Analysis: Notes of the Seminar Given in 1928–1930 by C. G. Jung (Princeton,
Bollingen Series XCIX, 1984).
62 Harold Coward, Jung and Eastern Thought (with contributions by J. Borelli, J. Jordens,
and J. Henderson) (Delhi, 1991) (citations are to the Indian edition), 110–11; John
Clarke, Jung and Eastern Thought: A Dialogue with the Orient (London, 1994), 110.
63 Meier, interview with the editor. On Hannah’s confusion see appendix 3, 92.
64 Meier, interview with the editor.
65 On 11 October 1930, Jung’s lecture was on Indian parallels (see appendix 1). On 7
October 1931 Jung presented a lecture covering the same ground (also in German), under
the same title: see Bericht über das Deutsche Seminar von Dr. C. G. Jung, 5–10. Oktober in
Küsnacht-Zürich, 66–73. Of this event, Emma Jung wrote to Oskar Schmitz on 12 October:
“The seminar was very well attended again—we were quite surprised that despite the critical times so many participants came from Germany, too. Pictures and phantasies were
again treated, of various female patients, but which all contained the ‘Kundalini’ symbolism.” “C. G. Jung: Letters to Oskar Schmitz, 1921–31,” 94–95.
66 The following are the manuscripts upon which it appears that Jung drew directly for
these seminars: 1) a three-page handwritten manuscript headed “Tantrism”; 2) a four-page
handwritten manuscript headed “Avalon Serpent,” consisting of references and quotations
from 1–76 and 210–72 of The Serpent Power (1st ed.); 3) a three-page handwritten manuscript headed “Chakras”; and 4) a two-page typewritten manuscript headed “Die Beschreibung der beiden Centren Shat-chakra Nirupana” (The description of each center

xxxiv

INTRODUCTION
ration with Hauer, which gave him the opportunity to expand rather
than to commence his work on this topic.
On 13 June 1931 Hauer presented a lecture, “Ueberblick über den
Yoga” (Overview of yoga), to the Psychological Club in Zurich. Jung’s
correspondence with Hauer sheds new light on the active organizational
role he took in the seminars. The earliest reference I have located concerning Hauer’s lectures is Emma Jung’s letter to Schmitz on 12 October 1931, in which she wrote: “I am just now corresponding with Prof.
Hauer in regard to a seminar which he would hold for us in Zurich also
for a week. He suggests the second half of March and as the theme, yoga
practices, I think. Would you be there too?”67 In the first letter located
between Hauer and Jung, Hauer thanked Jung for sending him his new
book: “I am sure that I will also derive sundry benefits from it for the
upcoming seminar. Again and again I have the strong impression that
for psychotherapy on the whole the way lies in the direction at which you
are pointing.”68 Hauer mentioned his forthcoming book on yoga,69 and
wrote:
I wanted to ask you, if (in the conviction that your analytical psychology and those elements of yoga which could be made effective
for the West belong together in a very profound way), I could dedicate my book to you.70 If you so desire, I will send you the printed
Shat-chakra Nirupana)—this manuscript appears incomplete, as it breaks off midway
through the description of the anvhata cakra. Manuscripts 1) and 3) closely correspond to
the text of “Indische Parallelen” (see appendix 1), which suggests that Jung used them
directly to lecture from. In addition, there exists a two-page manuscript headed “Tantr.
Texts. VII Shrichakrasambhara,” which he evidently used in preparation for his
Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule lectures on this text (Modern Psychology 3), and a
two-page manuscript headed “Prapanchasara Tantra,” which consists mainly in references
and quotations from 25–87 of Zimmer’s Artistic Form and Yoga. The Prapanchasvratantram
was vol. 18 of Woodroffe’s Tantrik Texts (Calcutta, 1935), in ETH.
67 Emma Jung to Schmitz, 12 October 1931, “C. G. Jung: Letters to Oskar Schmitz,” p.
95. Schmitz died later that year and hence was unable to attend. Jung wrote a foreword to
Schmitz’s fairy tale of the otter, in his Märchen aus dem Unbewussten (Fairy tales from the
unconscious) (Munich, 1932), which took the form of a memorial to Schmitz. See CW, vol.
18, §§1716–22.
68 Hauer to Jung, 20 November 1931, ETH, translated by Katherina Rowold. The work
in question was in all likelihood Jung’s collection of papers Seelenprobleme der Gegenwart
(Soul problems of the present) (Zurich, 1931).
69 J. W. Hauer, Der Yoga als Heilweg (Yoga as a way of salvation) (Stuttgart, 1932).
70 Hauer’s book Der Yoga als Heilweg carried a dedication to “C. G. Jung, the researcher
of a new way for mankind.” Copies of this work, together with Hauer’s Die Bhagavadgita in
neuer Sicht mit Uebersetzungen (The Bhagavadgita in a new light, with translation) (Stuttgart,
1934), are in Jung’s library, bearing personal inscriptions to Jung. Neither contains marginal annotations.

xxxv

INTRODUCTION
sheets for inspection as soon as I receive them. I hope that the book
will be printed at the latest by the time I give my seminar in Zurich. . . . With regard to my seminar I would like to express once
more the wish that it could, if possible, take place between April 15
and April 30, since I can hand over from the office of dean of the
faculty of Philosophy until then.71
Jung replied that the news that Hauer wanted to dedicate his book to
him was a happy surprise, and that “I am aware of the profound congeniality between my view and yoga.”72 Concerning the timing of the seminar, he added: “I would be willing to schedule your seminar for the
spring, if the necessary audience were present around that time. But if
this is not the case, we will have to arrange it for the autumn.”73 It seems
that it was not possible for the necessary audience to be present, for Jung
subsequently wrote to Hauer: “By the way, how do you feel about the
proposal to hold the planned seminar in the autumn? It would be very
nice if it could be arranged. Interest in it is very lively here. I would be
very grateful, if you could soon inform me as to which date would be
convenient for you. For us the beginning of October would be most suitable.”74 Hauer replied: “I will gladly hold the seminars in the autumn.
Beginning in October would be good for me.”75 A few months later,
Jung wrote to Hauer:
Following our recent discussion in the Club on your seminar in the
autumn, I am approaching you with the polite request to give your
opinion on our proposition: in light of the current economic situation the organisation of a seminar is not entirely easy. The Psychological Club is prepared in this case to take charge of the organisation and above all to put the hall at your disposition free of charge.
Our lecture hall accommodates 60 seats. In the meeting it was generally felt that it would be desirable that the fees would not exceed
Fr. 20 per person. It was equally emphasized that a course exceeding a duration of one week (6 lectures) would not be desirable. In
this case, one week of sold-out seminar would bring you a remuner71 Hauer to Jung, 20 November 1931, in ETH; translated by Katherina Rowold.
72 Jung to Hauer, 30 November 1931, in ibid.
73 Ibid.
74 Jung to Hauer, 1 March 1932, in ibid.
75 Hauer to Jung, 22 March 1932, in ibid.; my translation.

xxxvi

INTRODUCTION
ation of Fr 12000.76 With regards to method, I would propose at
least one hour of lecturing and 1 to 11⁄2 hours of answering questions and discussion.
According to instructions, I would like to ask you to give us your
opinion with regards to this proposition, so that the Club has a
definitive basis for the organisation of the seminar.
With regard to any English lectures, to be held in parallel with the
German ones, I could not yet tell you anything definite. The American economic crisis, you must know, has made itself felt here in that
the number of visitors has been very considerably reduced. For all
that, it would not be impossible for me to gather an English audience for you. However, I would advise you, not in the least to save
time and effort, to provide the English only with an hour of lecturing at a time. In the German seminar I will assist you with the psychological side.77
From this it appears that Hauer was to be paid the proceeds of the registration fees. It also indicates that the attendance at Jung’s English-language seminars had fallen off because of the American economic crisis
and that the dual-language format was used to maximize the fee. During
the summer Jung wrote to Hauer:
The rumour about your seminar is already creating a stir. Zimmer,
in Heidelberg, has asked me if he could come. Since I know him
personally, I have agreed. However, Spiegelberg of Hellerau, has
also asked me and has used your name as a reference. Other information that I have about Dr. Spiegelberg does not sound enthusiastic, hence I would like to ask you if you are keen on this Spiegelberg,
who seems to be an intellectual Jew. I have to admit that I am a bit
in two minds and that I am fearing for the quality of the atmosphere. However, I want to leave the decision entirely to you since
you seem to know Spiegelberg.78
76 This figure should probably be “Fr 1200.” The membership list of the Psychological
Club for 1933 lists sixty members and twenty-eight guests, of whom about a dozen seemed
to reside outside Switzerland. Professor Tadeus Reichstein, who attended the seminars,
recalled that there was a fee for both Hauer’s and Jung’s seminars (interview with the editor, 23 November 1994).
77 Jung to Hauer, 10 May 1932, in ETH; translated by Katherina Rowold.
78 Jung to Hauer, 23 June 1932, in ibid. Friedrich (later Frederick) Spiegelberg, who
wrote a review of Hauer’s Yoga als Heilweg in the Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung 71 (1932), did
attend the seminar, with his wife.

xxxvii

INTRODUCTION
Hauer’s lectures were titled “Der Yoga, im besondern die Bedeutung
des cakras” (Yoga, the meaning of the cakras in particular) and took
place between 3 and 8 October. In 1930 Jung had presented a German
seminar on 6–11 October and similarly in 1931 he presented a German
seminar on 5–10 October. Hence Hauer’s lectures followed these in format and timing.
Following Emma Jung’s invitation, Hauer stayed at Jung’s house during the lectures.79 Meier stated that Hauer’s German seminar took place
from 10:00 A.M. to noon with a tea break. Reichstein stated that between
thirty and forty people attended Hauer’s lectures and that between forty
and eighty attended Jung’s seminar, and that it was often difficult to get
a seat for the latter. He recalled that it was difficult to attend Jung’s seminars for many of those present wanted to preserve an exclusive atmosphere and prevent others from attending. Consequently, Reichstein
(who won the Nobel prize for chemistry) went directly to Jung, who gave
him permission to attend.80 After each lecture, Jung, Hauer, and Toni
Wolff had lunch together.81 Mrs. Hauer had painted enlarged copies of
the illustrations of the cakras from The Serpent Power, which were used for
the lectures.82
Hauer’s German and English lectures covered the same ground. The
latter were shortened versions of the former. In his English lectures he
omitted his own German translation of the ûa°-cakra-nirÖpaõa, which he
presented in his German lectures.
While the lectures were in progress Jung’s ongoing seminar on visions
was suspended. Jung also presented a synoptic illustrated lecture entitled
“Western Parallels to Tantric Symbols” on the evening of 7 October.83

HAUER’S LECTURES
Hauer commenced with a historical overview of yoga and an explanation
of his overall approach. He defined yoga as follows: “Yoga means to grasp
the real essence, the inner structure of a matter, in its living reality as a
79 Letters of Emma Jung to Hauer, cited in Dierks, Jakob Wilhelm Hauer, 1881–1962,

283.
80 Reichstein, interview with the editor.
81 Meier, interview with the editor.
82 Meier donated these to the Jung Institute when it was founded, and they remain there
(interview with the editor). Jung described them as “very wonderful” ( Jung to Mrs. Hauer,
11 January 1933, ETH).
83 “Westliche Parallelen zu den tantrischen Symbolen,” in Tantra Yoga, 153–58.

xxxviii

INTRODUCTION
dynamic substance, and the laws of that matter.”84 He claimed that the
profundity of Kundalini yoga was that it viewed reality as “a balanced
polarity of woman and man power.”85 He stated that its practice developed in the following way: “First the inner reality is grasped, then the
symbol is used to crystallize this in the imagination, and then comes the
real practice of meditating on the six cakras.”86 He compared it favorably
with the classical yoga of Patanjali, in which he saw a tendency to lose the
god in the self of man, and with Hatha yoga, in which he saw “a psychotechnical tendency leading away from the central powers to the more
psychical, even physiological powers.”87 He explained this tendency as
follows:
One meditates upon the symbol, and appropriates its contents
partly intellectually, partly psychically, and arrives in this way at a
certain kind of psychic change; perhaps sometimes one may arrive
at a stratum, in which happen the radical developments of the soul.
But not often. The danger to people who deal with the cakras from
without is that they remain in the region of these psychic processes
. . . and the real change in the inmost structure of their being would
not take place.88
For Hauer this presented the main difficulty lying in the way of gaining
an understanding of Kundalini yoga. He argued that the way to overcome this was through grasping it on the basis of one’s own inner experience: “I understand an inner reality only in so far as I have it within myself and am able to look at this reality that has come up into my conscious
from the depth of my subconscious; or if it has come from without, it
must have become absolutely living in my own conscious.”89 Hence he
stated: “I freed myself to a great extent in the beginning from the Indian
way of looking at things. I find that I do not reach the inner meaning if
I do not look at them in my own way, from my own point of view.”90 The
rest of Hauer’s lectures were taken up with an explication of the metaphysics that underlay Kundalini yoga and the symbolism of the cakras.
Meier recalled that the tone of Hauer’s German lectures was dry and
there was little time for dialogue except in the tea breaks. By contrast,
Jung’s seminars came alive.91 Reichstein stated that Hauer was a fanatic
and that there was no real discussion, for he was “so persuaded of his
84 Hauer, HS, 1.

85 Ibid., 8.

86 Ibid., 14.

87 Ibid., 13. Hauer’s distinction between these two types of yoga was challenged by Zim-

mer, who claimed that Hauer was overstating the difference. See 15–16.
88 Ibid., 14.
89 Ibid., 1–2.
90 Ibid., 19.
91 Meier, interview with the editor.

xxxix

INTRODUCTION
views” and “only accepted what he himself said.” Reichstein described
Jung’s seminars as “very impressive” and noted that there was a “possibility for open discussion.”92 Speigelberg recalled that Jung asked “many
questions from the Indologists about Indian yoga practices . . . and
about the interrelation of that Indian system and Western psychology as
a whole. I think this seminar is still the last word that has ever been said
about the deeper psychological meanings of yoga practice.”93 News of
the lectures spread far. Shortly afterward, Hans Trüb wrote to Martin
Buber that “I would like to speak to you of Hauer’s seminar. Overall it
was for me inspiring as anticipated. The ‘purusa’-atman was for me a
complete new revelation—above all, the very foreign way (Kundalini
yoga) to it for us.”94
Hauer’s method seemed to have influenced Jung’s. In his seminars
Jung attempted to lead the participants to an understanding of Kundalini yoga on the basis of their own inner experience, namely, the process
of individuation. Consequently the account of Kundalini yoga with
which they were presented was triply filtered—first through Woodroffe’s
translations and commentaries, then through Hauer’s, and finally
through Jung’s. Not surprisingly, the three were often at variance, both
in their terminology and in their understanding of the processes involved. Hence a good deal of the questions from the floor queried these
differences.
It is important to note that for those who attended Jung’s seminars,
they were not simply a course in hermeneutics but engendered particular experiences. Thus Reichstein recalled having dreams that depicted
the movement of the Kundalini serpent during and after the seminars,
and that “at least a few” others had similar experiences.95

PSYCHOLOGY AND YOGA: PROBLEMS OF
COMPARISON AND COLLABORATION
Shortly after his lectures, Hauer wrote to Jung: “The week in Zurich has
provided me with much stimulation and perhaps I may entertain the
hope that the threads of our co-operation have been tightened a little as
92 Reichstein, interview with the editor.
93 Frederic Spiegelberg interview, Jung Oral History Archive, Countway Library of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 1–2.
94 Hans Trüb to Martin Buber, 27 November 1932, Buber Archive, Hebrew University of
Jerusalem; my translation.
95 Reichstein, interview with the editor.

xl

INTRODUCTION
well.”96 The feeling seems to have been reciprocal, for Jung replied, “I
would like to extend our collaboration in a special way,” and invited him
to participate in an interdisciplinary journal that Daniel Brody of Rhein
Verlag had proposed to him.97
The following year Hauer founded the German Faith Movement. In his
work Germanic Vision of God, Hauer proclaimed the advent of a specifically
German (or Indo-Germanic) religion that would provide a liberation
from the “alien” Semitic spirit of Christianity. Hauer stated: “The new
phase of the German Faith Movement which began with the meeting in
Eisenach in July 1933, must be understood in close relation with the national movement which led to the foundation of the Third Reich. Like the
latter, the German Faith Movement is an eruption from the biological and
spiritual depths of the German nation.”98 He unsuccessfully attempted
to have it recognized as the official religion of National Socialism.
In 1935 Hauer contributed an essay entitled “Die indo-arische Lehre
vom Selbste im Vergleich mit Kants Lehre vom intelligiblen Subject”
(The Indo-Aryan teaching on the self in comparison with Kant’s teaching on the intelligible subject) to the Festschrift volume for Jung’s sixtieth
birthday.99
In his 1936 essay “Wotan” Jung took Hauer and the German Faith
Movement as exemplars of his thesis that the political events in Germany
could be psychologically explained as stemming from the renewed activity of the old Germanic god Wotan.100
In 1938 Hauer again presented a series of lectures at the Psychological Club in Zurich between 7 and 12 March, on “Der Quellgrund des
Glaubens und die religiöse Gestaltwerdung” (The basic source of faith
and the development of religious forms). Meier recalled that Hauer lectured on “the symbolic meaning of the flag (svastika), which met with
extremely severe criticism and opposition.”101 Their divergent views of
96 Hauer to Jung, 11 November 1932, in ETH; translated by Katherina Rowold.
97 Jung to Hauer, 14 November 1932, Jung: Letters, vol. 1, 103. The project never materialized. Brody was the publisher of the proceedings of the Eranos conferences, the Eranos Jahrbücher.
98 Hauer, “Origin of the German Faith Movement,” in J. W. Hauer, K. Heim, and K.
Adam, Germany’s New Religion: The German Faith Movement, translated by T. Scott-Craig and
R. Davies (London, 1937), 29–30.
99 Die kulturelle Bedeutung der komplexen Psychologie (The cultural significance of complex
psychology), edited by the Psychological Club, Zurich (Berlin, 1935).
100 CW, vol. 12.
101 Meier, letter to the editor, 25 October 1993. In his diary for 11 March, Hauer noted
that the subject of his lecture that day was the spiritual and religious background of the
political situation in Germany (cited in Dierks, Jakob Wilhelm Hauer, 1881–1962, 297).
This presumably was the lecture that Meier is referring to.

xli

INTRODUCTION
the religio-political situation in Germany led to a break between Hauer
and Jung and his circle.102 Concerning Hauer’s conduct during this period, Mircea Eliade recalled: “I heard from Scholem that Hauer was still
a very good man because during the Nazi persecution, he adopted two
or three Jewish children, or a Jewish girl. He said Hauer was one of the
very few scholars in Germany sympathetic with the Nazi regime which
Scholem said, ‘I don’t have anything against.’”103
Hauer carried on his half of his dialogue with Jung on the comparison
between yoga and psychotherapy in his subsequent publications. In Der
Yoga: Ein Indischer Weg zum Selbst104 (Yoga: an Indian way to the self) he
commenced by posing questions that have subsequently increased in
pertinence with the advent of the new age movement and the popularity
of alternative religions:
This problem, whether and to what extent this Eastern “way to salvation” is also of value for Western people, remains in a state of flux,
and has engaged me very seriously. Was it not a mistake or even a
danger when for one’s own “way of salvation” men of the West struggled with yoga? Why did these men not adhere to scientific research, philosophical reflections in the Western manner, life and
deed, as the only ways to “salvation”? Did the West itself not also
have in its mysticism a way to the inner, that was of better use to it
than yoga? Why were the developing depth psychology and psychotherapy not enough for it? Did we actually need a new impulse from
the East? These problems stem from the lectures and study seminars
in C. G. Jung’s “Psychological Club.”105
In his view Jung’s analytical psychology had become a method and hence
had succumbed to the dangers of the psychotechnical externalization
that had been a danger for yoga.106 In Der Yoga he devoted a chapter to
a critique of Jung’s work. He wrote: “I myself stand critically opposed to
the hypothesis of native and inherited ‘Archetypes.’ To say above all that
the historico-religious empirical basis for the thesis of the ‘archetypes’ is
extremely weak.”107 He had also come to a negative judgment on Jung’s
102 In his diary entry for 8 March Hauer wrote: “I am too ‘German’ for these people.”
Cited in Dierks, Jakob Wilhelm Hauer, 1881–1962, 297; my translation.
103 Mircea Eliade interview, Jung Oral History Archive, 11.
104 Hauer, Der Yoga: Ein Indischer Weg zum Selbst (Leipzig, 1958).
105 Ibid., 5; my translation. There has been a great deal of literature comparing yoga and
psychotherapy. For two early studies, see Geraldine Coster, Yoga and Western Psychology: A
Comparison (London, 1934); and Alan Watts, Psychotherapy East and West (New York,
1961).
106 Cited in Dierks, Jakob Wilhelm Hauer, 1881–1962, 298.
107 Hauer, Der Yoga, 419; my translation.

xlii

INTRODUCTION
interpretation of Kundalini yoga: “In my view in the Jungian circle the
mythic images of tantric yoga are all too rapidly put together with the
‘Archetypes,’ which doesn’t help the clear understanding of either.”108
However, formidable problems confront any attempt to interpret tantric texts, because of the complexity of their composition. Eliade noted
that “tantric texts are often composed in an ‘intentional language’
(sandhv-bhvüv), a secret, dark and ambiguous language in which a state
of consciousness is expressed by an erotic term and the vocabulary of
mythology or cosmology is charged with Hatha-yogic or sexual meanings.”109 This leads to the situation that
a tantric text can be read with a number of keys: liturgical, yogic,
tantric, etc. . . . To read a text with the “yogic key” is to decipher the
various stages of meditation to which it refers. The tantric meaning
is usually erotic, but it is difficult to decide whether the reference is
to a concrete act or to a sexual symbolism. More precisely, it is a
delicate problem to distinguish between the “concrete” and the
“symbolic,” tantric svdhana having as its goal precisely the transubstantiation of every “concrete” experience, the transformation of
physiology into liturgy.110
Subsequent evaluations of Jung’s psychological interpretations have
turned upon whether one can regard it as a valid additional “key.” They
have been criticized by both scholars and adepts of Kundalini yoga. Harold Coward concluded:
With today’s much better knowledge of Eastern thought, it is doubtful that Jung’s “rope trick” of standing Kundalini yoga on its head
and then lopping off the last two cakras as “superfluous speculations
with no practical value” would be accepted. What Jung’s “Commentary” accomplished then, and still does today, is to provide added
insight into his understanding of the process of Individuation, not an
accurate description of Kundalini.111
108 Ibid., 421; my translation.
109 Eliade, Yoga: Immortality and Freedom, 249.
110 Ibid., 252. On the problems posed by intentional language, see Bharati, The Tantric
Tradition, 164–88.
111 Coward, Jung and Eastern Thought, 123. Coward is referring to Jung’s statement that
there was no need to elaborate upon the symbolism of the last two cakras, as they were
beyond Western experience (see below, 57). One may add that their attainment is not
exactly common in India. This text, which includes John Borelli’s “Annotated Bibliography
of Jung and Eastern Traditions,” remains the most useful overall study of Jung and Indian
thought, upon which it focuses. John Clarke’s Jung and Eastern Thought: A Dialogue with the
Orient is an unsuccessful attempt to subsume Jung’s work on Eastern thought under the

xliii

INTRODUCTION
If Jung’s seminars are evaluated from the perspective of understanding
Kundalini yoga within its own sociohistorical context this criticism is
doubtless valid. However, within the context of Jung’s collaboration with
Hauer, this was the task of the latter; Jung’s aim was to elucidate the
psychological meaning of spontaneous symbolism that resembled that of
Kundalini yoga. In this respect, Jung stated in a letter that “the entry of
the East [into the West] is rather a psychological fact with a long history
behind it. The first signs are found in Meister Eckhart, Leibniz, Kant,
Hegel, Schopenhauer, and E. von Hartmann. But it is not at all the actual East we are dealing with but the fact of the collective unconscious,
which is omnipresent.”112 Thus for Jung, the Western “discovery” of the
East constituted a critical chapter in the “discovery” of the collective unconscious. Jung’s psychological interpretation is predicated on the assumption that Kundalini yoga represented a systemization of inner experience that spontaneously presented itself in the West in a mode that
resembled but was not necessarily identical with the way it did so in the
East. This is borne out by an interchange shortly after the Kundalini seminars in the resumption of the seminar on visions:
Mrs. Sawyer: But in the cakras we always had the Kundalini
separate.
Dr. Jung: Quite, and in this case they are apparently not separate,
but that makes no difference. We must never forget that the Kundalini system is a specific Indian production, and we have to deal here
with Western material; so we are probably wise to assume this is for
us the real stuff, and not Indian material which has been differentiated and made abstract since thousands of years.113
rubric of Gadamerian hermeneutics. For a critique of Jung’s approach to Eastern thought,
see Richard Jones, “Jung and Eastern Religious Traditions,” Religion 9 (1979): 141–55. For
an appreciation, see F. Humphries, “Yoga Philosophy and Jung,” in The Yogi and the Mystic:
Studies in Indian and Comparative Mysticism, edited by Karl Werner (London, 1989), 140–48.
112 Jung to A. Vetter, 25 January 1932, Jung: Letters, vol. 1, 87; translation modified. For
Schopenhauer on India, see Schwab, The Oriental Renaissance, 427–35. Schopenhauer had
compared Meister Eckhart’s writings with the Vedanta (ibid., 428). Buddhism featured
prominently in von Hartmann’s Philosophie des Unbewussten (Philosophy of the unconscious) (Berlin, 1870).
113 Jung, The Visions Seminar, vol. 7, 30–31. In his account of spontaneous Kundalini experiences in the West Lee Sannella also highlighted a notable divergence from the Eastern
depictions: “According to the classical model, the Kundalini awakens, or is awakened, at
the base of the spine, travels straight up the central axis of the body, and completes its
journey when it reaches the crown of the head. . . . By contrast, the clinical picture is that
the Kundalini energy travels up the legs and the back to the top of the head, then down the
face, through the throat, to a terminal point in the abdominal area.” The Kundalini Experience: Psychosis or Transcendence? 106.

xliv

INTRODUCTION
It would also be a mistake to view Jung’s commentary as consisting in the
translation of the terms of Kundalini yoga into psychological concepts
whose meaning had already been delimited in advance: for in the course
of translating the terms of Kundalini yoga into those of analytical psychology, the latter became altered and extended. At base, the symbolism
of the cakras enabled Jung to develop an archetypal regional topography
of the psyche and to provide a narration of the process of individuation
in terms of the imaginal transit between these regions.114 It also led him
to argue that for individual transformation to be possible, it required a
concomitant transformation of ontology, to which his work was oriented.
In his major works on Western religious traditions subsequent to his encounter with Kundalini yoga Jung presented his psychological interpretations of alchemy and Christianity.115 In these his studies on yoga served
as a vital orientation, both in his mode of understanding the practices of
the alchemists—as evidenced by his stating that “every profound student
of alchemy knows that the making of gold was not the real purpose and
that the process was a Western form of yoga”116—and in his view of alchemy with its valuation of the body and the feminine—concerns that
are preeminent in tantrism as representing the countercurrent to orthodox Christianity.
From the experiential viewpoint Gopi Krishna criticized Jung’s exposition:
C. G. Jung, in his commentary on the book [The Secret of the Golden
Flower], entirely preoccupied with his own theories about the unconscious, despite the unambiguous nature of the statements in the
work, finds in it only material for the corroboration of his own ideas,
and nothing beyond that. The same thing happened in a seminar
held by him on Kundalini, of which a written summary is available
in the Jung Institute. None of the scholars present, as evident from
the views expressed by them, displayed the least knowledge about
the real significance of the ancient document they were discussing
at the time.117
114 On the issue of archetypal topography, see Edward Casey, “Toward an Archetypal
Imagination,” Spring: An Annual for Archetypal Psychology and Jungian Thought (1974): 1–33;
and Peter Bishop, “Archetypal Topography: The Karma-Kargyuda Lineage Tree,” ibid.
(1981): 67–76.
115 Jung, CW, vols. 11–14.
116 Jung, Modern Psychology 3, 107.
117 Gopi Krishna, Kundalini for the New Age, 43. For a critical appraisal of Jung’s commentary on The Secret of the Golden Flower, see Thomas Cleary’s new translation (together
with commentary) of The Secret of the Golden Flower: The Classic Chinese Book of Life (San Francisco, 1991).

xlv

INTRODUCTION
Fundamentally, the divergence between indigenous understandings of
Kundalini yoga and Jung’s interpretation of it is that for the former texts
such as the ûa°-cakra-nirÖpaõa primarily depict the profound modifications of experience and embodiment occasioned by specific ritual practices rather than the symbolic depiction of a universal process of individuation. However, the problems that confront Jung’s interpretations at a
more general level apply to other attempts to translate the terms of Kundalini yoga into modern concepts.118 In the course of such attempts the
terms became hybridized, and the resultant blend is no longer distinctly
“Eastern” or “Western.”119 Ultimately, Jung’s seminars should be assessed in terms of the goal he set forward in the following statements:
Western consciousness is by no means consciousness in general. It
is rather a historically conditioned and geographically confined dimension, which represents only a part of mankind.120
The knowledge of Eastern psychology namely forms the indispensable basis for a critique and an objective consideration of Western
psychology.121
Thus in Jung’s view the outcome of Western psychology’s encounter
with Eastern thought was by no means a small matter, for on this the very
possibility of a psychology worthy of the name rested.122 The continued
relevance of this seminar today—in a vastly transformed historical
clime—principally lies in the mode in which it highlights this capital
question and attempts to establish it at the forefront of the psychological
agenda, whether or not one accepts Jung’s provisional solutions to it.
S.S.

118 Such as Gopi Krishna’s own theoretical attempts to transcribe it in contemporary
post-Darwinian categories, as in the following statement: “In the language of science, Kundalini represents the mechanism of evolution in human beings.” Gopi Krishna, Kundalini
for the New Age, 87.
119 On the contemporary significance of the notion of hybridity within the postcolonial
context, see Homi Bhabha, The Location of Culture (London, 1993).
120 Jung, “Commentary on the ‘Secret of the Golden Flower’ ,” in CW, vol. 13, §84; translation modified.
121 Jung, “Foreword to Abegg: ‘Ostasien Denkt Anders’ ” (East Asia thinks otherwise), in
CW, vol. 18, §1483; translation modified.
122 On the encounter of Western psychology and Eastern thought, see Eugene Taylor,
“Contemporary Interest in Classical Eastern Psychology,” in Asian Contributions to Psychology,
edited by A. Paranjpe, D. Ho, and R. Rieber (New York, 1988), 79–119.

xlvi

BOLLINGEN SERIES XCIX

LECTURE 1
12 October 1932

Dr. Jung: Ladies and gentlemen, we have just had a seminar about tantric yoga,1 and as there are always misunderstandings in the wake of such
an event, I am devoting some time to the discussion and elucidation of
any questions that you may have. Even those who were not there will be
interested, I suppose, because I have spoken of the cakras before.2 Moreover, in the pursuit of our visions we have now reached the stage where
symbols analogous to those of tantric yoga are beginning to operate. You
remember, we have seen how our patient’s visions in their natural and
quite uninfluenced development brought the first mandala. In the last
hour of our spring seminar I showed you a mandala that created itself,
the mandala of the child within the circles, and the patient’s attempts to
unite with the child.3 That is entering the mandala, and there already
the symbolism of tantra yoga begins. So it is not irrelevant that we discuss
this subject now; it fits in well with what we have done here. As a matter
of fact, our former seminar has led us up to the psychology of tantric
yoga, what I have hitherto called mandala psychology.
I shall take first this question by Mrs. Bailward: “I understand that the
kleça asmitv ‘contains the germ of being a personality’ and the kleça dveüa
1 Concerning terminology, Hauer commenced his seminar by noting: “For Kundalini
Yoga, I usually say Tantra Yoga, the word Tantra being the name for those works in which
the Kundalini Yoga is expounded” (HS, 1).
2 See appendix 1. Concerning the cakras, Woodroffe stated: “According to the Hindu
doctrine, these Cakras are differing centres of consciousness, vitality and Tattvik energy.”
In Arthur Avalon (pseud. Sir John Woodroffe), The Serpent Power (London, 1919), 16.
Hauer had defined them as “symbols of the experience of life, they show the real inner
meaning of such an experience, to help you to understand and to interpret spiritually what
you have lived” (HS, 58).
3 The vision was as follows: “ ‘I saw two rings of gold upon the black ground. One ring was
smaller and was encircled by the larger ring. Within the small ring lay a male child as
though in the womb.’ (That is, in the centre.) ‘It was surrounded by amniotic fluid. I
wanted to get to the child which held out its arm toward me but I could not seem to step
over the outer rim’ ”; to which Jung commented: “Here the mandala psychology begins.”
Interpretation of Visions vol. 6, 29 June 1932, 127–28.

3

LECTURE 1
‘the wish to be two,’ or hatred.4 Does Professor Hauer mean personality
or individuality here? When it has built up the individuality, how would
hatred be torn out by the roots?”
Well, there is the kleça of dividing and discrimination, of becoming a
personality, an ego, where there is also the aspect of hatred. The kleças
are urges, a natural instinctive form in which libido first appears out of
the unconscious; that is the psychological energy, or libido, in its simplest form of manifestation.5 Now, according to tantric teaching, there is
an urge to produce a personality, something that is centered, and divided from other beings, and that would be the kleça of discrimination.
It is what one would describe in Western philosophical terms as an urge
or instinct of individuation.
The instinct of individuation is found everywhere in life, for there is
no life on earth that is not individual. Each form of life is manifested in
a differentiated being naturally, otherwise life could not exist. An innate
urge of life is to produce an individual as complete as possible. For instance, a bird with all its feathers and colors and the size that belongs to
that particular species. So the entelechia, the urge of realization, naturally
pushes man to be himself. Given a chance to be himself, he would most
certainly grow into his own form, if there were not obstacles and inhibi4 Hauer defined the kleças as follows: “The roots in the subconscious are called kleça . . .
and kleça I translate as ‘ailment, or the force that makes the ailment’ ” (HS, 37). He defines
the kleça dveüa as “the wish to be two, that is, putting one’s own being and personality up
against another one, it is the power of being one’s self” (ibid., 38), and the kleça asmitv as
“the character of being an ego. The way we assume that I think, that I feel, or I experience
is a certain faculty in us which is called asmitv ” (ibid., 40). Dasgupta defined the kleças as
afflictions. Surendranath Dasgupta, Yoga as Philosophy and Religion (London, 1924), 104.
Zimmer defined kleça as “anything which, adhering to man’s nature, restricts or impairs its
manifestation of its true essence.” Heinrich Zimmer, Philosophies of India, edited by Joseph
Campbell (London, Bollingen Series XXVI, 1953), 294. He defined the kleça asmitv as
“the sensation, and crude notion, ‘I am I; cogito ergo sum; the obvious ego, supporting my
experience, is the real essence and foundation of my being’ ” (Zimmer, Philosophies of
India, 295). He defined the kleça dveüa as the feeling of “disinclination, distaste, dislike,
repugnance, and hatred” (Zimmer, Philosophies of India). Feuerstein stated: “The kleças
provide the dynamic framework of the phenomenal consciousness. They urge the organism to burst into activity, to feel, to think, to want. As the basic emotional and motivational
factors they lie at the root of all misery. . . . Thus the normal human situation can be characterized as the product of a cognitive error . . . for which there is one remedy: the recovery of the self as the true identity of man.” The Philosophy of Classical Yoga (Manchester,
1980), 65–66.
5 In his commentary on Patanjali’s Yoga Sutras, Jung stated that the kleças are “the instinctive urges and oppressions. These are the compulsive mechanisms which lie at the base of
the human being. . . . Not knowing our true being is the foundation of all the other kleças.”
Modern Psychology 3, 16.

4

12 OCTOBER 1932
tions of many descriptions that hinder him from becoming what he is
really meant to be. So the kleça that contains the germ of personality can
be called just as well the kleça of individuation, because what we call personality is an aspect of individuation. Even if you don’t become a complete realization of yourself, you become at least a person; you have a
certain conscious form. Of course, it is not a totality; it is only a part,
perhaps, and your true individuality is still behind the screen—yet what
is manifested on the surface is surely a unit. One is not necessarily conscious of the totality, and perhaps other people see more clearly who you
are than you do yourself. So individuality is always. It is everywhere. Everything that has life is individual—a dog, a plant, everything living—but
of course it is far from being conscious of its individuality. A dog has
probably an exceedingly limited idea of himself as compared with the
sum total of his individuality. As most people, no matter how much they
think of themselves, are egos, yet at the same time they are individuals,
almost as if they were individuated. For they are in a way individuated
from the very beginning of their lives, yet they are not conscious of it.
Individuation only takes place when you are conscious of it, but individuality is always there from the beginning of your existence.
Mrs. Baynes: I did not get where the hate, dveüa, came in.
Dr. Jung: Hatred is the thing that divides, the force which discriminates. It is so when two people fall in love; they are at first almost identical. There is a great deal of participation mystique, so they need hatred in
order to separate themselves. After a while the whole thing turns into a
wild hatred; they get resistances against one another in order to force
each other off—otherwise they remain in a common unconsciousness
which they simply cannot stand. One sees that also in analysis. In the case
of an exaggerated transference, after a while there are corresponding
resistances. This too is a certain hatred.
The old Greek put phobos, fear, instead of hatred. They said that the
firstborn thing was either Eros or phobos; some say Eros and others phobos,
according to their temperaments. There are optimists who say the real
thing is love, and pessimists who say the real thing is phobos. Phobos separates more than hatred, because fear causes one to run away, to remove
oneself from the place of danger.
I was once asked a philosophical question by a Hindu: “Does a man
who loves God need more or fewer incarnations to reach his final salvation than a man who hates God?” Now, what would you answer? I gave it
up naturally. And he said: “A man who loves God will need seven incarnations to become perfect, and a man who hates God only three, because he certainly will think of him and cling to him very much more
5

LECTURE 1
than the man who loves God.” That, in a way, is true; hatred is a tremendous cement. So for us the Greek formulation phobos is perhaps better
than hatred as the principle of separation. There has been, and is still,
more participation mystique in India than in Greece, and the West has certainly a more discriminating mind than the East. Therefore, as our civilization largely depends upon the Greek genius, with us it would be fear
and not hatred.
Mrs. Crowley: Yet in the cakras apparently the most important gesture
is that of dispelling fear.
Dr. Jung: Yes, but the gods are always carrying weapons also, and weapons are not an expression of any particular love.
Miss Wolff: I have my notes here, and I think I see what caused Mrs.
Bailward’s confusion. Professor Hauer said in German hasserfüllte
Zweiung, but it does not mean to become two, exactly; it means to become a subject against an object—there are two things.6 The English
translation is not so clear.
Dr. Jung: Entzweiung means separation. Now the rest of the question?
Mrs. Bailward: I mean, would the yogi consider the state of hatred a
necessary condition in building up individuality?
Dr. Jung: Yes, he cannot help considering it so, for the whole yoga process, whether classical or Kundalini yoga, naturally has a tendency to
make the individual one, even as the god is one, like brahman, an existing nonexisting oneness.
The question continues: “And when it had built up the individuality,
how would hatred be torn out by the roots?”
Miss Wolff: Professor Hauer spoke of the two aspects of the kleça.7 In
the imperfect condition—the sthÖla aspect—the urge to be a subject
over against an object is mingled with hatred. But in the sÖküma aspect
the same urge is the power to become a personality.
Dr. Jung: Yes, it is an important and very bewildering thing in this
whole terminology that one always must make the distinction between
the sthÖla and sÖküma aspects.8 I do not speak of the parv aspect because
6 See n. 4.
7 Hauer stated: “The kleça are in citta in two forms or aspects, the sthÖla, meaning the
rough coarse aspect . . . and the sÖküma, or subtle aspect” (HS, 37), and “the subtle or
sÖküma aspect of dveüa is the power to be a separate personality; that is the metapsychic
force that creates or makes possible the personality. But the sthÖla aspect is the one we
experience in ordinary life, that is mixed with hatred” (ibid., 38).
8 Hauer stated that according to tantric yoga, there were three aspects of reality—sthÖla,
sÖküma, and parv: “The sthÖla aspect means reality as it appears to our senses. . . . Behind
this, or working as the dynamic force within this sthÖla aspect, we have the sÖküma aspect,
which, literally translated, means the subtle, fine aspect” (ibid., 26). He defined the parv

6

12 OCTOBER 1932
that is what Professor Hauer calls the metaphysical. I must confess that
there the mist begins for me—I do not risk myself there. The sthÖla aspect is simply things as we see them. The sÖküma aspect is what we guess
about them, or the abstractions or philosophical conclusions we draw
from observed facts. When we see people who make efforts to consolidate themselves, to be egos, and therefore resist and hate one another,
we see the sthÖla aspect, and we are only aware of the kleça of hatred,
called dveüa. But if we go a step higher, we suddenly understand that this
foolish kind of hatred, all these personal resistances, are merely external
aspects of very important and profound things.
To quote a practical case: when a person complains that he is always
on bad terms with his wife or the people whom he loves, and that there
are terrible scenes or resistances between them, you will see when you
analyze this person that he has an attack of hatred. He has been living in
participation mystique with those he loves. He has spread himself over
other people until he has become identical with them, which is a violation of the principle of individuality. Then they have resistances naturally, in order to keep themselves apart. I say:
Of course, it is most regrettable that you always get into trouble, but
don’t you see what you are doing? You love somebody, you identify
with them, and of course you prevail against the objects of your love
and repress them by your very self-evident identity. You handle
them as if they were yourself, and naturally there will be resistances.
It is a violation of the individuality of those people, and it is a sin
against your own individuality. Those resistances are a most useful
and important instinct: you have resistances, scenes, and disappointments so that you may become finally conscious of yourself,
and then hatred is no more.
That is the sÖküma aspect.
If a person thoroughly understands this, he will agree and not worry.
In other words, he knows when he loves that soon he will hate. Therefore
he will laugh when he is going uphill and weep when he is going downhill, like Till Eulenspiegel.9 He will realize the paradox of life—that he
aspect as “the causes and the real character of those centres of energy. For beyond those
dynamic forces of the subtle kind . . . there is a power which can no longer be conceived in
mere terms of cosmic energies. . . . There we get into the religious sphere, which is connected with the godhead as it is in its inner nature” (ibid., 26–27).
9 This was an analogy that Jung used on several occasions; cf. CW, vol. 7, §47; and Nietzsche’s “Zarathustra”: Notes of the Seminar Given in 1934–1939, edited by James Jarrett (Princeton, Bollingen Series XCIX, and London, 1988), vol. 1, 226. The editors of Jung’s letters

7

LECTURE 1
cannot be perfect, and he cannot always be one with himself. It is our
idea to be one, to have absolutely clear situations in life. But it is all impossible—it is all too one-sided, and we are not one-sided. You see, the
analytical process tears up hatred by the roots by explaining the sÖküma
aspect, namely, the aspect on the level of understanding, of abstraction,
theory, wisdom. And so we learn that what is a regrettable habit, for instance, or impossible moods or inexplicable disagreements in the sthÖla
aspect, is something quite different in the sÖküma aspect.
Then a second question: “Is there a psychological equivalent to the
tattva,10 and the saôskvra?”11 Well, the tattva, being the essence of
things, is psychologically again a sÖküma aspect of things. The term libido,
or energy, is a good example of a tattva. It is not a substance but an abstraction. Energy is not to be observed in nature; it does not exist. What
exists in nature is natural force, like a waterfall, or a light, or a fire, or a
chemical process. There we apply the term energy, but energy in itself
does not exist, despite the fact that you can buy it at the electrical works.
But that is merely a metaphorical energy. Energy proper is an abstraction of a physical force, a certain amount of intensity. It is a concept of
the natural forces in their sÖküma aspect, where they are no longer manifestations but tattva, essence, abstraction. You see the Eastern mind is
concretistic—when it arrives at a conclusion or builds up an abstraction,
the latter is already a substance; it is almost visible or audible—one can
almost touch it. Whereas with us this process is rather spurious, as when
a concept like energy becomes fairly well known, so that any workman
speaks of it. Then naturally people assume that this energy must be
something one can put into a bottle—one can buy it and sell it, so it must
be something tangible. There that concretistic quality of the Eastern
mind comes in with us. For in reality energy is not substantial: it is a
conformity of things, say, or the intensity of various physical or material
processes. In the East, when anybody speaks of tattva, they conceive of it
provide the following note: “A popular figure in German folklore, representing the superiority of the wily peasant over the town dwellers and tradesmen. The first collection of
his jests and practical jokes was published in 1515. In one story Till Eulenspiegel, unlike
his companions, rejoices when walking uphill in anticipation of the coming descent.”
C. G. Jung: Letters, vol. 2, 603.
10 Hauer translated tattva “literally as thatness, or in German Dasheit. Thatness means
that hidden power in the whole universe which has a certain tendency to create and move
in a specific way—that and that” (HS, 31).
11 Hauer translated saôskvra as “the maker who makes things so that they are really a
working compound, a working whole” (HS, 41). He commented: “At this moment, what we
think, how we sit, how we talk, is all caused by saôskvra. If we think we are now talking
freely, if we experience it as that in our consciousness . . . that is illusion” (ibid., 42).

8

12 OCTOBER 1932
as already in existence, and, mind you, a complete existence—as if a
tattva really could become visible to them. I don’t know whether anybody
has had a vision of tattva, but that might be, for they can visualize any
concept, no matter how abstract. So the tattva, which is a concrete thing
in the East, has with us a sÖküma aspect—it is an abstraction, an idea. The
concept of energy is a very suitable example, but there are of course
other ideas of the sort, such as the principles of gravity, or the idea of an
atom, or of electrons—these are the equivalents of tattvas. In psychology,
as I say, it would be libido, which is also a concept.
Then the saôskvra, if understood as something concrete, has really no
analogy with us. We are unable to concretize these things. That is an
entirely philosophical teaching, which for us has only a certain validity
inasmuch as we believe in the migration of souls, reincarnation, or any
pre-existing conditions. Our idea of heredity would be similar to the idea
of saôskvra, as well as our hypothesis of the collective unconscious. For
the mind in a child is by no means tabula rasa. The unconscious mind is
full of a rich world of archetypal images. The archetypes are conditions,
laws or categories of creative fantasy, and therefore the psychological
equivalent of the saôskvra. But mind you, in the Eastern mind the doctrine of the saôskvra is so different from that definition that perhaps a
Hindu would object to my attempt at a comparison. But the archetypal
images are really the nearest thing we can see.
Dr. Reichstein: I want to ask about the sthÖla aspect. I thought sthÖla was
the more physical aspect, and sÖküma more the psychological, not only
the abstract, aspect. For it cannot be perceived by intellect only; it is a
peculiar kind of being connected with things.
Dr. Jung: You are quite right, but the psychological aspect of things
implies also a philosophy about them. For instance, take the psychological aspect of a chair: it has both a sthÖla and a sÖküma aspect. It is a physical phenomenon and as such it is obvious in its sthÖla aspect. But in its
sÖküma aspect it is not so obvious—the sÖküma aspect is the idea. As in the
Platonic teaching of the eidolon, the eidos of a thing is the sÖküma aspect.
But in Plato we can still see concretizations: he says that all things are
derivatives, or incomplete imitations of the eidola that are conserved in a
sort of heavenly storehouse, in which are the models of every existing
thing. So all the forms of our empirical world would derive from these
eidola. This idea is the sÖküma aspect, or you can say the psychology of
things. But for us, the Platonic ideas, which Plato understood to be really
existing, are psychological concepts, or even mere illusions or assumptions. For even if we assume that there is such a heavenly storehouse
where models of things really do exist, we are not a bit sure of it; thinking
9

LECTURE 1
like that does not produce the thing. If the primitive mind thinks a thing,
it is. A dream, for instance, is to them as real as this chair. They must be
very careful not to think certain things, as the thought easily might become reality. We are still like that—we say a mouthful, and at the same
time we touch wood.
Mrs. Diebold: Would the sÖküma aspect correspond to Kant’s thing in
itself [das Ding an sich]?
Dr. Jung: Yes, as would also his use of the term noumenon. The noumenon is the idea, the spiritual essence of a thing. You see, Kant was
already a very critical man, and in his Critique of Pure Reason12 he says that
the thing in itself, das Ding an sich, is a purely negative borderline concept, which does not guarantee that such a thing exists at all. He simply
makes such a concept to express the fact that behind the world of phenomena, there is something about which we can say nothing. Yet in his
psychological lectures he spoke of a plurality of noumena—that there are
many things in themselves—which is a contradiction of his Critique of
Pure Reason.13
Mrs. Crowley: Is that not really an archetype?
Dr. Jung: Yes, the eidos in Plato is of course the archetype. The term
archetype comes from St. Augustine, who used it in that Platonic sense.
He was in that respect a neoplatonist, like so many other philosophers in
those days. But with them it was not a psychological concept; the ideas
were concretized—that means hypostatized, which is a very good word.
You see, hypostasis is not a hypothesis. A hypothesis is an assumption I
make, an idea I have formed, in order to attempt an explanation of facts.
But I know all the time that I have only assumed it, and that my idea still
needs proof. Hypothesis means to put something which isn’t there
under something; Unterstellung is the German term for it. There is no
English term, as far as I am aware, with exactly that sense. It might be an
assumption, or it could also have an unfavorable nuance of insinuation.
Now, hypostasis means that there is something below which is substantial, upon which something else rests.
Mr. Dell: From what root does hypostasis come?
12 Immanuel Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, 2d ed., translated by Norman Kemp Smith
(London, 1929), 266ff.
13 In his 1898 lecture before the Zofingia Society, “Thoughts on Speculative Inquiry,”
Jung critiqued Kant’s concept of the Ding an sich, arguing against Kant’s rigid distinction
between the knowable, phenomenal realm and the unknowable noumenal realm, arguing that science progressively made the noumenal known. Zofingia Lectures, in CW A,
§§195–99. He also commented on Kant’s lectures on psychology (Vorlesungen über Psychologie [Leipzig, 1889]) in “The Relations between the Ego and the Unconscious,” in CW 7,
§260, note 7.

10

12 OCTOBER 1932
Dr. Jung: Histemi is the Greek verb, to be standing, and hypo means
below. The same root is in the Greek word ikonostasis, which, in the
Greek Orthodox church, is the background behind the altar where the
statues of the saints stand. The image or picture of a saint is called an
ikon, and ikonostasis is the place upon which it stands, usually a pedestal,
or a wall upon which are placed such images or pictures. To make a
hypostasis means to invent a subject which is hanging in the air. It has no
basis, but you assume that it has, and say it is a real thing. For instance,
you invent the idea of a tattva and say it is by no means a mere word, a
breath of air with nothing underneath it. You say tattva is an essence; it
is something substantial—something is standing underneath that holds
it up. A hypostasis contains always the assumption that a thing really is,
and the natural primitive mind is always hypostatizing. In our better moments, when we are a bit superstitious, we also have hypostases.
Mr. Dell: The hypostasis of gravity makes the apple fall.
Dr. Jung: Yes, you assume the thing is, and that makes the apple fall.
Or, for instance, Kant says, in his famous discussion of the assumption of
God, that “God is, God is not”—that when anybody says God is, he just
says so, but his saying so does not mean that he is. He can say God is, but
perhaps he is not. But when you hypostatize, then by saying God is, you
assume that God really exists. You have made God, so that he is in reality.
One can bring about most unfortunate situations by simply declaring
that a thing is so. That is what the animus does and what one always
objects to in the animus. “Oh, I thought . . .”—and then the house burns
down because you thought you had put the fire out. But unfortunately
the house has burned down.
Mrs. Baynes: Don’t all heuristic principles tend to run into hypostases?
Dr. Jung: They run a risk, sure enough. As soon as a hypothesis has
given evidence of its applicability, it tends to become a truth, to become
a hypostasis—and we forget entirely that it is only a hypothesis, an intentional, arbitrary theory on our part.
Dr. Kranefeldt: The sexual theory of Freud could be called a hypothesis,
which then became a hypostasis.
Dr. Jung: Exactly: it proves its evidence by a certain amount of facts,
and then one assumes it must be a truth. Well now, this is merely about
concepts, and in tantric yoga there were things which needed further
explanation from the psychological side.
Mrs. Sawyer: When Professor Hauer spoke of the cakras, he called only
the picture inside each a mandala. Could we not call the total cakra a
mandala?
Dr. Jung: Yes, the cakras are also occasionally called mandalas. Naturally
11

LECTURE 1
Professor Hauer does not attach such a technical meaning to the mandala as we do. He called the total picture padma, the lotus, or cakra.14
Mandala means ring, or circle. It can be a magic circle, for example, or it
can be a cycle. There are Vedic sutras in which the series of chapters
makes a cycle that is called a mandala; for instance, the third mandala,
chapter 10, verse 15—the mandala is simply the name of the cycle.
Mrs. Sawyer: But he called a square a mandala.15
Dr. Jung: Yes, he calls that a mandala, and naturally anything within is
a mandala too, and this is exactly what you see in the Lamaistic pictures:16 the mandala, the lotus, is inside, as well as the temple, and the
cloister with the square walls, the whole surrounded by the magic circle;
then above are the gods, and mountains below. The term mandala with
us has taken on an importance which it does not possess in India, where
it is merely one of the Yantras,17 an instrument of worship in the Lamaistic cult and in tantric yoga. And mind you, the tantric school is little
known in India—you could ask millions of Hindus, and they would not
have the faintest idea of what it was. It would be as if you asked the honorable citizens of Zurich what they had to tell you of scholasticism; they
would know about as much as the Hindu knows about tantric yoga. And
if you asked a Hindu what a mandala was, he would say that a round
table, or anything circular, was a mandala. But to us it is a specific term.
Even within the frame of the tantric school the mandala has not the importance that it has with us. Our idea of it would come nearest to Lamaism, the Tibetan religion, but this is hardly known, and its textbooks
have been translated only very recently, hardly ten years ago. One of the
fundamental sources is the Shrichakrasambhara, a tantric text translated
by Sir John Woodroffe.18
14 Hauer stated: “Cakra means circle, but it is also called padma, meaning lotus-flower”
(HS, 61).
15 In his description of the mÖlvdhvra cakra, Hauer referred to the “square or mandala
of the earth” (HS, 71).
16 [Note to the 1932 edition: See the frontispiece of the Golden Flower.] Jung and Wilhelm, The Secret of the Golden Flower (London and New York, 1931). This illustration is also
reproduced in “Concerning Mandala Symbolism,” in CW, vol. 9, part 1, fig. 1, and Psychology and Alchemy, in CW, vol. 12, fig. 43.
17 Zimmer stated that “the figurative sacred image (pratimv) [under which he included
the mandala] is just one member of an entire family of representational sacred images
(yantras).” Artistic Form and Yoga in the Sacred Images of India, translated by G. Chapple and
J. Lawson (Princeton, 1984), 29.
18 This text was actually edited and translated by Kazi Dawa-Samdap: Shrichakrasambhara:
A Buddhist Tantra, Tantrik Texts, vol. 7 (London, 1919). The series was under the general
editorship of Woodroffe, who wrote a foreword to this volume. Jung’s library contained six

12

12 OCTOBER 1932
Dr. Barker: Professor Hauer said that in the second cakra of the water
region, one plunges into life without any reservations.19 But that region
is still far above us. It is difficult to believe this interpretation, because
when the adolescent goes into life without reserves, it is as if he were
going from the higher to the lower.
Dr. Jung: You are playing the role of the world bewilderer20 in asking
such questions. Here you touch upon something really most bewildering, for when you try to translate that material into psychological language, you reach amazing conclusions. Take the mÖlvdhvra cakra,21
which seems very simple. Its psychological location is in the perineum.
You assume you know all about it, but psychologically what is mÖlvdhvra?
You think of it as that region down below in the abdomen, having to do
with sexuality and all sorts of unsavory things. But that is not mÖlvdhvra;
mÖlvdhvra is something quite different. Perhaps we should look at the
second cakra22 first.
The ocean with the sea monster is above in the system of the cakras,
but in reality we find always that it is below in our psychology—we always
descend into the unconscious. Therefore mÖlvdhvra must be something
quite different from what we would conclude. Have you ever been in
mÖlvdhvra? Some of you could say you have been in the unconscious, in
the ocean, and there you had seen the leviathan. Let us assume that you
have really done the night sea journey, have wrestled with the great monster. That would mean you had been in svadhiü°hana, the second center,
the water region. But then, have you been in mÖlvdhvra, too? Here is a
great difficulty. You will probably be puzzled when I tell you my conception of mÖlvdhvra. You see, mÖlvdhvra is a whole world; each cakra23 is a
whole world. Perhaps you remember the picture which I showed of a
patient, where she was entangled in the roots of a tree, and then above
volumes from this series, published between 1914 and 1924. Jung provided an extended
commentary on this text in his Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule lectures in 1938–
39, in Modern Psychology 3, 42–120.
19 Hauer described the second cakra, svvdhiü°hvna, as “the life we live freely and thoughtlessly, just throwing ourselves into the stream of life and letting ourselves be carried, floating on to all that comes to us” (HS, 75).
20 A term by which the Kundalini is described in the ûa°-cakra-nirÖpaõa; see appendix 4,
112.
21 Hauer described Mul dh ra as “the cakra that holds the root of things. It is the region
of the earth, of the creative man and woman power . . . the foundation of the world” (HS,
p. 68).
22 The representation of the svvdhiü°hana cakra shows a makara, a mythological sea monster, on water. See figure 3.
23 Hauer defined the cakras as “symbols of the experience of life” (HS, 58).

13

LECTURE 1
she was stretching up toward the light.24 Now, where was that woman
when she was in the roots?
Answer: In mÖlvdhvra.
Dr. Jung: Yes, and in what condition would that be in reality?
Miss Hannah: Was it the self sleeping?
Dr. Jung: Of course, the self is then asleep. And in which stage is the
self asleep and the ego conscious? Here, of course, in this conscious world
where we are all reasonable and respectable people, adapted individuals
as one says. Everything runs smoothly; we are going to have lunch, we
have appointments, we are perfectly normal citizens of certain states. We
are under certain obligations and cannot run away easily without getting
neurotic; we have to look after our duties. So we are all in the roots, we
are upon our root support. (“Root support” is the literal translation of
mÖlvdhvra.) We are in our roots right in this world—when you buy your
ticket from the streetcar conductor, for instance, or for the theater, or
pay the waiter—that is reality as you touch it. And then the self is asleep,
which means that all things concerning the gods are asleep.
Now, after this startling statement we have to find out whether such an
interpretation is really justifiable. I am by no means sure. I am even convinced that Professor Hauer would not agree with me right on the spot.
In these matters one needs a great deal of psychology in order to make
it palatable to the Western mind. If we do not try hard and dare to commit many errors in assimilating it to our Western mentality, we simply get
poisoned. For these symbols have a terribly clinging tendency. They
catch the unconscious somehow and cling to us. But they are a foreign
body in our system—corpus alienum—and they inhibit the natural growth
and development of our own psychology. It is like a secondary growth or
a poison. Therefore one has to make almost heroic attempts to master
these things, to do something against those symbols in order to deprive
them of their influence. Perhaps you cannot fully realize what I say, but
take it as a hypothesis. It is more than a hypothesis, it is even a truth. I
have seen too often how dangerous their influence may be.
If we assume that mÖlvdhvra, being the roots, is the earth upon which
we stand, it necessarily must be our conscious world, because here we
are, standing upon this earth, and here are the four corners of this earth.
We are in the earth mandala. And whatever we say of mÖlvdhvra is true
24 [Note to the 1932 edition: See the Golden Flower, no. 5.] In CW, vol. 13, figure A5. This
illustration was also reproduced in “Concerning Mandala Symbolism,” in CW, vol. 9, part
1, figure 25. However, the description seems to correspond more closely to a vision of
Christiana Morgan that Jung discussed on 25 February 1931. See The Visions Seminar,
vol. 2, 77.

14

12 OCTOBER 1932
of this world. It is a place where mankind is a victim of impulses, instincts, unconsciousness, of participation mystique, where we are in a dark
and unconscious place. We are hapless victims of circumstances, our reason practically can do very little. Yes, when times are quiet, if there is no
important psychological storm, we can do something with the help of
technique. But then comes a storm, say, a war or a revolution, and the
whole thing is destroyed and we are nowhere.
Moreover, when we are in this three-dimensional space, talking sense
and doing apparently meaningful things, we are nonindividual—we are
just fish in the sea. Only at times have we an inkling of the next cakra.
Something works in certain people on Sunday mornings, or perhaps one
day in the year, say Good Friday—they feel a gentle urge to go to church.
Many people instead have an urge to go to the mountains, into nature,
where they have another sort of emotion. Now, that is a faint stirring of
the sleeping beauty; something which is not to be accounted for starts in
the unconscious. Some strange urge underneath forces them to do
something which is not just the ordinary thing. So we may assume that
the place where the self, the psychological non-ego, is asleep is the most
banal place in the world—a railway station, a theater, the family, the professional situation—there the gods are sleeping; there we are just reasonable, or as unreasonable, as unconscious animals. And this is mÖlvdhvra.
If that is so, then the next cakra, svvdhiü°hvna, must be the unconscious, symbolized by the sea, and in the sea is a huge leviathan which
threatens one with annihilation. Moreover, we must remember that men
have made these symbols. Tantric yoga in its old form is surely the work
of men, so we can expect a good deal of masculine psychology. Therefore no wonder that in the second cakra is the great half-moon, which is
of course a female symbol. Also, the whole thing is in the form of the
padma or lotus, and the lotus is the yoni.25 (Padma is simply the hieratic
name, the metaphor for the yoni, the female organ.)
Mrs. Sawyer: Professor Hauer said that the crescent was not a female
symbol; it belonged to åiva.26
Dr. Jung: That is so for the East, and if you ask a Hindu about these
things he would never admit that you could put mÖlvdhvra above
svvdhiü°hvna. Their point of view is absolutely different. If you ask them
25 Hauer described the representation of this cakra as follows: “Inside is a circle, the
pericarp, containing a white lotus mandala. . . . There is a half moon, also white” (HS,
74).
26 Hauer had stated: “The crescent in svvdhiü°hana stands for åiva,” to which Mrs. Sawyer
asked: “Is not the crescent usually a feminine symbol?” Hauer replied: “Not in India. There
the crescent is always the sign of åiva” (HS, 84).

15

LECTURE 1
about the sun analogy they would equally deny it, yet one can show that
the symbolism of the sun myth is there too.
Mrs. Crowley: Their symbolism can’t be the same as ours; their gods are
in the earth.
Dr. Jung: Naturally. You see, a Hindu is normal when he is not in this
world. Therefore if you assimilate these symbols, if you get into the
Hindu mentality, you are just upside-down, you are all wrong. They have
the unconscious above, we have it below. Everything is just the opposite.
The south on all our maps is below, but in the East the south is above and
the north below, and east and west are exchanged. It is quite the other
way around.
Now, the second center has all the attributes that characterize the unconscious. Therefore we may assume that the way out of our mÖlvdhvra
existence leads into the water. A man I know who is not in analysis has
had interesting dreams representing this quite frequently, and they were
all identical. He found himself moving along a certain road, or a little
street or path, either in a vehicle or on foot—the dream always began
with such a movement—and then, to his great amazement, all these
roads inevitably led into water, the second cakra.
Therefore, the very first demand of a mystery cult always has been to
go into water, into the baptismal fount. The way into any higher development leads through water, with the danger of being swallowed by the
monster. We would say today that is not the case with the Christian baptism—there is no danger in being baptized. But if you study the beautiful
mosaic pictures in the Baptistry of the Orthodox in Ravenna (which
dates from the fourth or the beginning of the fifth century, when the
baptism was still a mystery cult), you see four scenes depicted on the wall:
two describe the baptism of Christ in the Jordan; and the fourth is
St. Peter drowning in a lake during a storm, and the Saviour is rescuing
him.27 Baptism is a symbolical drowning. There are certain sects in Russia that, in order to make it real, put people under the water until they
occasionally do get drowned. It is a symbolic death out of which new
life comes, a newborn babe. The initiates are often fed with milk after27 Jung provides an account of this experience in MDR, 314–18. There he stated that
he had asked an acquaintance who was going to Ravenna to obtain pictures for him, and
his acquaintance learned that the mosaics did not exist (ibid., 315). Aniela Jaffé noted
that Jung explained this as a “momentary new creation by the unconscious, arising out of
his thoughts about archetypal initiation. The immediate cause of the concretisation lay, in
his opinion, in a projection of his anima upon Galla Placida” (ibid., 316). Jung’s recollections in MDR of the mosaics differ somewhat from that given here; these differences are
noted in Dan Noel’s “A Viewpoint on Jung’s Ravenna Vision,” Harvest: Journal for Jungian
Studies 39 (1993): 159–63, which forms a reappraisal of this whole episode.

16

12 OCTOBER 1932
ward, as in the cult of Attis, where after the baptism people were fed with
milk for eight days as if they were little babies, and they got a new
name.28
So the symbolism in the svvdhiü°hvna cakra is the worldwide idea of the
baptism by water with all its dangers of being drowned or devoured by
the makara. Today, instead of the sea or leviathan we say analysis, which
is equally dangerous. One goes under the water, makes the acquaintance
of the leviathan there, and that is either the source of regeneration or
destruction. And if that analogy holds true, then the analogy of the sun
myth must hold true too, for the whole baptismal story is in the sun myth.
You see that the sun in the afternoon is getting old and weak, and therefore he is drowned; he goes down into the Western sea, travels underneath the waters (the night sea journey), and comes up in the morning
reborn in the East. So one would call the second cakra the cakra or mandala of baptism, or of rebirth, or of destruction—whatever the consequence of the baptism may be.
We also can say something about the details of this cakra. The fiery red
is understandable. mÖlvdhvra is darker, the color of blood, of dark passion. But this vermilion of svvdhiü°hvna contains far more light, and if
you assume that this has really also something to do with the sun’s
course, it might be the sun’s rays while setting or rising—the color of the
dawn or the last rays of the sun are a rather humid kind of red. Then
after the second center we could expect the manifestation of newborn
life, a manifestation of light, intensity, of high activity, and that would be
maõipÖra.29 But before we speak of that center we should exhaust this
second cakra. It is a peculiar fact that in the East they put these cakras
not below our feet but above. We would put mÖlvdhvra above because
this is our conscious world, and the next cakra would be underneath—
that is our feeling, because we really begin above. It is all exchanged; we
begin in our conscious world, so we can say our mÖlvdhvra might be not
down below in the belly but up in the head. You see, that puts everything
upside-down.
Mrs. Sawyer: But in the unconscious it is the same.
Dr. Jung: Ah, now comes the unconscious where les extrêmes se touchent.
There everything is yea and nay, and there mÖlvdhvra is above as well
as below. We have an analogy in the tantric system of cakras. What is
28 Jung provided an interpretation of the Attis myth in Symbols of Transformation, in CW,
vol. 5, §§659–62.
29 Hauer defined the maõipÖra cakra as follows: “Maõi means the pearl or the jewel, and
the pÖra meaning fullness or richness, one might call it the treasure of the pearl, or the
treasure of the jewels” (HS, 68).

17

LECTURE 1
the analogy between vjñv,30 the highest center, and mÖlvdhvra? It is very
important.
Mrs. Fierz: The uniting of åakti and åiva.31
Dr. Jung: Yes, Kundalini is united with the li´ga in mÖlvdhvra32 in the
state of the sleeping beauty, and the same condition prevails up above in
the vjñv center where the devz has returned to the god and they are one
again. Again they are in the creative condition, but in an entirely different form. As they are united below so they are united above. So the two
centers can be exchanged.
You see, in adapting that system to ourselves, we must realize where we
stand before we can assimilate such a thing. With us it is apparently the
other way around; we do not go up to the unconscious, we go down—it
is a katabasis. This was always so. The old mystery cults often took place
underground. One sees that in old Christian churches in the crypt
below the altar—the underchurch. It is the same idea as the Mithraic
spelaeum, which was the cave or the room where the cult of Mithras took
place. It was always a place under the earth, or it was a real grotto. The
cult of Attis also took place in grottos. The grotto in which Christ was
born in Bethlehem is said to have been a spelaeum.33 Then you remember that St. Peter’s in Rome now stands where the taurobolia, the blood
baptisms in the cult of Attis, had taken place before. Also, the high
priests of the cult of Attis had the title Papas, and the pope, who before
was simply a bishop of Rome, took on that title. Attis himself is a dying
and resurrecting god—showing the continuity of true history.
Mr. Baumann: Professor Hauer mentioned that man can go two ways
to the unconscious—either to the left or to the right. In one way he faces
the monster and is swallowed by it, and in the other way he comes from
behind and can attack the sea monster.34
30 Hauer defined the vjñv cakra as meaning “ ‘command’; it is something that one knows
one ought to do, it has to do with Erkenntnis, knowledge. . . . You might call it, in English,
acknowledgement. It is a command, or an acknowledgement to oneself, as if told that
something was one’s duty” (HS, 69).
31 Hauer described the vjñv cakra as follows: “The yoni and the li´ga, woman power and
man power, are united, they are not apart” (HS, 90).
32 Hauer described the mulvdhvra cakra as follows: “Here are again the yoni and the li´ga,
and here Kundalini sleeps. This yoni is red and the li´ga dark brown, which is the symbol
of the erotic life in its fullness. It is quite a different red from that in the heart [vjñv] centre
where it is the erotic life in the higher sense, where whilst here it is in the real earthly sense”
(HS, 92).
33 In “Visions of Zosimos” (1937), Jung noted: “Attis has close affinities with Christ. According to tradition, the birthplace at Bethlehem was once an Attis sanctuary. This tradition has been confirmed by recent excavations.” CW, vol. 13, §92, n. 6.
34 See appendix 3, n. 5, 93.

18

12 OCTOBER 1932
Dr. Jung: Those are finesses in the Hindu system. We must be quite
satisfied if we succeed in digesting and assimilating this material in a
rough outline. Well, I have explained why in the East the unconscious is
above whereas with us it is below. So we can reverse the whole thing, as
if we were coming down from mÖlvdhvra, as if that were the highest center. Of course, we can put it like that. But then, we can also say we are
going up.
Mrs. Sawyer: In all the visions we have been dealing with in the English
seminar, first one goes down and then up. I don’t see how you can
change that.
Dr. Jung: When you start in mÖlvdhvra you go down, for mÖlvdhvra is
then on top.
Mrs. Sawyer: But mÖlvdhvra is underground.
Dr. Jung: No, it is not necessarily underground, it is of earth. This is a
façon de parler. We are on the earth or in the earth. That woman entangled in the roots is just entangled in her personal life. As a matter of fact,
she happens to have been particularly so, and therefore she represented
herself as entangled in the duties of life, in her relations with her family,
and so on. For her, going to analysis was surely going up. And going
through the Christian baptism is going up, but that does not hinder its
being represented by going down into the water. Christ doesn’t climb up
into the Jordan.
Mrs. Crowley: Don’t you think the Eastern idea of the unconscious is
different from ours? It is a different kind of unconscious.
Dr. Jung: Yes, they have an entirely different idea, but it is no use discussing what their idea is because we don’t know it.
Mrs. Crowley: But you can get it from reading the Sanskrit things—the
Vedic things.
Dr. Jung: I have read a good deal but it is not clear. I know only that
they see these things very differently. For instance, I had some correspondence with a Hindu pundit about the mandala cakras. He informed
me that they had to do with medicine, that they were anatomical and had
nothing like a philosophical meaning. Such an idea did not enter his
horizon. He was a man who had read the Sanskrit texts. I don’t know him
personally; he is a university professor at Dacca.
Mrs. Crowley: They are just as divided in their types over there as here.
Dr. Jung: Naturally—they have many different views, and the whole
East has very different views from ours about these matters. They don’t
recognize the unconscious, and just as little do they know what we mean
by consciousness. Their picture of the world is entirely different from
ours, so we can understand it only inasmuch as we try to understand it in
19

LECTURE 1
our own terms. Therefore, I make the attempt to approach the thing
from the psychological point of view. I am sorry to have bewildered you,
but you will be more bewildered if you take these things literally. (You
had better not.) If you think in those terms, you build up an apparent
Hindu system with the psychology of the Western mind, and you cannot
do that—you simply poison yourself. So if we deal with it all—and I am
afraid we have to because of similar structures in our own unconscious—
we must do it in this way. We must realize, or take into consideration at
least, that mÖlvdhvra is here, the life of this earth, and here the god is
asleep. And then you go to the krater35—to use that old quotation from
Zosimos—or to the unconscious, and that is understood to be a higher
condition than before, because there you approach another kind of life.
And you move there only through the Kundalini that has been
aroused.36
Now, here we have to speak of Kundalini and what she is, or how she
can be awakened.37 You remember that Professor Hauer said that some
instigation from above arouses Kundalini, and he also said one must
have a purified buddhi,38 or a purified spirit, in order to arouse her. So
the progress into the second cakra is possible only if you have aroused
the serpent, and the serpent can only be aroused by the right attitude.
Expressed in psychological terms, that would mean that you can approach the unconscious in only one way, namely, by a purified mind, by
a right attitude, and by the grace of heaven, which is the Kundalini.
Something in you, an urge in you, must lead you to it. If that does not
35 In “Visions of Zosimos” Jung wrote of the krater: “The krater is obviously a wonderworking vessel, a font or piscina, in which the immersion takes place and transformation
into a spiritual being is effected.” CW, vol. 13, §97.
36 In the manuscript “Die Beschreibung der beiden Centren Shat-chakra Nirupana,”
Jung wrote: “In Mula dhara Kundalini sleeps. It is latent activity, which shows outside.
Through it man is bound to the world of appearance and believes that his ego is identical
with his self. Kundalini is concealed cit (consciousness), and when it awakes it turns back
to its master. It is ‘world-consciousness,’ in contrast to civ-atma = individual consciousness”
(2; my translation).
37 Hauer defined the Kundalini as follows: “Kundalini as understood here is not in any
way an erotic power of man, but a form of woman power which is nothing but pure knowledge; there is in woman power a certain power of knowledge, a force, which has nothing
to do with the erotic, and this has to be set free and united with the knowledge force of man
power at its highest point of development” (HS, 97).
38 Hauer described buddhi as follows: “Buddhi means the organ of intuition that is composed of pure sattva, that light-world-substance which is at the base of cognition or knowledge, insight” (HS, 96). Eliade stated that buddhi was the term in Samkhya yoga for the
intellect. Mircea Eliade, Yoga: Immortality and Freedom, translated by Willard R. Trask
(Bollingen Series LVI; reprint, London, 1989), 18.

20

12 OCTOBER 1932
exist, then it is only artificial. So there must be something peculiar in
you, a leading spark, some incentive, that forces you on through the
water and toward the next center. And that is the Kundalini, something
absolutely unrecognizable, which can show, say, as fear, as a neurosis, or
apparently also as vivid interest; but it must be something which is superior to your will. Otherwise you don’t go through it. You will turn back
when you meet the first obstacle; as soon as you see the leviathan you will
run away. But if that living spark, that urge, that need, gets you by the
neck, then you cannot turn back; you have to face the music.
I will give you an example from a medieval book, that famous
Hypnerotomachia, or Le Songe de Poliphile,39 which I have quoted here before. It was written in the fifteenth century by a Christian monk of a famous Roman family. He got into the unconscious, as we say. It is like the
beginning of Dante’s Inferno but expressed in entirely different terms.
He depicts himself as traveling in the Black Forest, which in those days,
especially to Italians, was still the ultima Thule where the unicorn still
lived, as wild and unknown as the forests of central Africa to us. And
there he loses his way, and then a wolf appears. At first he is afraid, but
afterward he follows the wolf to a spring where he drinks of the water—
an allusion to baptism. Then he comes to the ruins of an ancient Roman
town, and he goes in through the gate and sees statues and peculiar symbolic inscriptions, which he quotes, and which are most interesting from
a psychological point of view. Then suddenly he is afraid; it becomes
uncanny. He wants to go back, and he turns to go out through the gate
again, but now there is a dragon sitting behind him that bars the way,
and he cannot go back; he simply must go forward. The dragon is Kundalini. You see, the Kundalini in psychological terms is that which makes
you go on the greatest adventures. I say, “Oh, damn, why did I ever try
such a thing?” But if I turn back, then the whole adventure goes out of
my life, and my life is nothing any longer; it has lost its flavor. It is this
quest that makes life livable, and this is Kundalini; this is the divine urge.
For instance, when a knight in the Middle Ages did marvelous works, like
the great labors of Hercules, when he fought dragons and liberated virgins, it was all for his Lady—she was Kundalini. And when Leo and Holly
go to Africa to seek She,40 and She urges them on to the most incredible
adventures, that is Kundalini.
39 The Dream of Poliphio, related and interpreted by Linda Fierz-David, translated by Mary
Hottinger (Bollingen Series XXV; reprint, Dallas, 1987). Jung wrote an introduction to
this volume, which is also reproduced in CW, vol. 18, §§1749–52.
40 For Jung’s discussion of Rider Haggard’s She (London, 1887), see his Analytical Psychology, 136–44.

21

LECTURE 1
Mrs. Crowley: The anima?
Dr. Jung: Yes, the anima is the Kundalini.41 That is the very reason why
I hold that this second center, despite the Hindu interpretation of the
crescent being male, is intensely female, for the water is the womb of
rebirth, the baptismal fount. The moon is of course a female symbol;
and, moreover, I have a Tibetan picture at home in which åiva is depicted in the female form, dancing on the corpses in the burial ground.
At all events, the moon is always understood as the receptacle of the souls
of the dead. They migrate to the moon after death, and the moon gives
birth to the souls in the sun. She first gets quite full of dead souls—that
is the pregnant full moon—and then she gives them to the sun, where
the souls attain new life (a Manichean myth). So the moon is a symbol of
rebirth. Then the moon in this cakra is not above—it is below, like a cup
from which flows the offering of souls to the cakras above, maõipura and
anvhata. You see, there is the sun myth again.
41 Jung’s interpretation of the Kundalini as the anima may in part have been suggested
by the following description of her cited in The Serpent Power: “She . . . is the ‘Inner Woman’
to whom reference was made when it was said, ‘What need have I of outer women? I have
an Inner Woman within myself’ ” (1st ed., 272). This sentence is heavily marked in Jung’s
copy of the book; the whole phrase is cited in his “Die Beschreibung der beiden Centren
Shat-chakra Nirupana” (2), and the last phrase, “I have an Inner Woman within myself,” is
cited again in his “Avalon Serpent” manuscript (1). In “Concerning Mandala Symbolism”
(1950), while commenting on a mandala painted by a young woman in which a coiled
snake appeared, Jung said of the snake: “It is trying to get out: it is the awakening of Kundalini, meaning that the patient’s chthonic nature is becoming active. . . . In practice it means
becoming conscious of one’s instinctual nature.” CW, vol. 9, part 1, §667.

22

LECTURE 2
19 October 1932

Dr. Jung: We will go on with further information about the cakras. You
remember, I told you last time that I would analyze the meaning of the
symbolic attributes of the mÖlvdhvra. You probably have noticed that in
analyzing these symbols we have followed very much the same method
that we use in dream analysis: we look at all the symbols and try to construct the meaning which seems to be indicated by the totality of the
attributes. In that way we reached the conclusion that mÖlvdhvra was a
symbol of our conscious earthly personal existence.
To repeat in a few words the argument: mÖlvdhvra is characterized as
being the sign of the earth; the square in the center is the earth, the
elephant being the carrying power, the psychical energy or the libido.
Then the name mÖlvdhvra, meaning the root support, also shows that we
are in the region of the roots of our existence, which would be our personal bodily existence on this earth. Another very important attribute is
that the gods are asleep; the li´ga is a mere germ, and the Kundalini, the
sleeping beauty, is the possibility of a world which has not yet come off.
So that indicates a condition in which man seems to be the only active
power, and the gods, or the impersonal, non-ego powers, are inefficient—they are doing practically nothing. And that is very much the situation of our modern European consciousness. Then we have still another attribute which is not shown in that symbol itself but which is given
in the Hindu commentaries—namely, that this cakra is located, as it
were, in the lower basin, which at once gives an entirely different meaning to the thing. For it is then something that is within our body, whereas
we had reached the conclusion that it was without—that is, our conscious world. That the Hindu commentaries put the conscious world inside the body is to us a very astonishing fact.
We can take this commentary exactly like a patient’s association in a
dream or vision, and according to his idea, the association would be: it
was something in his belly. Now, why does he say so? Perhaps our existence here in the flesh, in the three-dimensional space, really has some23

LECTURE 2
thing to do with the symbol in question. Perhaps it is a condition that
could be expressed by the allegory of an abdomen—as if we were in an
abdomen. And to be in an abdomen would mean most probably that we
were in the mother, in a condition of development or beginning. That
point of view would throw a peculiar light on our symbolism. It would
convey the idea that our actual existence, this world, is a sort of womb;
we are mere beginnings, less than embryos; we are just germs that have
still to become, like an egg in the womb. Of course, this is simply a commentary, showing how the Hindu would look upon our world as it is—he
perhaps understands his conscious world as being merely a nursery.
Now, that is a piece of philosophy. As you see, it is an analogy with
Christian philosophy according to which this actual personal existence is
only transitory. We are not meant to stay in this condition; we are
planted on this earth for the purpose of becoming better and better, and
when we die we shall become angels. In the Islamic world there is very
much the same idea. I remember talking to an Arab in the tombs of the
Caliphs in Cairo. I was admiring a tomb that was made in a wonderful
style, really a very beautiful thing. He noticed my admiration and said:
You Europeans are funny people. To admire this house is what we
do, that is what we believe. You believe in dollars and automobiles
and railways. But which is wiser, to build a house for a short time
or for a long time? If you know that you will be in a place only for
a few years, and that you will later stay in another place for fifty
years, will you build your house for those few years, or for the fifty
years?
I said, sure enough, “For the fifty years.” And he said: “That is what we
do—we build our houses for eternity, where we shall stay the longest.”1
That is the point of view of many peoples, whether they are Hindus or
Christians or Mohammedans. According to their idea mÖlvdhvra is a
transitory thing, the sprouting condition in which things begin. Of
course, that is very much in opposition to what people of today believe.
We read our papers, we look into the political and economic world, believing this to be the definite thing, as if all depended on what we were
going to do about the currency, the general economic conditions, and
so on. We are all quite crazy about it, as if it were particularly right to be
concerned with it. But those other people are countless; we are few in
number compared with the people who have an entirely different point
1 Jung was in Cairo in 1926, and his account of his trip is found in MDR, 282–304,
where this anecdote doesn’t appear.

24

19 OCTOBER 1932
of view as to the meaning of the world. To them, we are just ridiculous;
we are living in a sort of illusion about our world. So this standpoint of
the yoga philosophy is thus far a part of the general tendency of the
philosophic and religious world. It is very general to look at the
mÖlvdhvra as a transitory phenomenon.
For our purpose we can leave aside this particular philosophic comment. It is quite interesting, yet it should not disturb us. For we have to
take for granted that this is the world where the real things happen, that
it is the only world, and perhaps there is nothing beyond—at least, we
have no experiences that would prove it to us. We have to be concerned
with the immediate reality, and we must say, as it is shown in the
mÖlvdhvra symbol, that the gods which would stand for that other eternal
order of things are asleep. They are inefficient, they mean nothing. Yet
we are allowed to admit that in the very center of this field of consciousness are germs of something that point to a different kind of consciousness, though for the time being they are inactive. So, to put it on a psychological level, it seems evident that even in our consciousness, of
which we believe that it is “nothing but,” and perfectly clear and selfevident and banal—even in that field there is the spark of something
that points to another conception of life.
This is merely a statement about a generally prevailing condition,
namely, through the consensus gentium, the harmony of opinion in the
whole world, among men, it is understood that somewhere in the interior of our normal consciousness, there is such a thing. There are sleeping gods, or a germ, that might enable us, as it has enabled people at all
times, to look at the mÖlvdhvra world from an entirely different point of
view, that allows them even to put mÖlvdhvra right down into the bottom
of the trunk where things start—meaning that in the great body of the
cosmic world, this world holds the lowest place, the place of the beginning. So what we take to be the culmination of a long history and a long
evolution would be really a nursery, and the great, important things are
high above it and are still to come—exactly as the unconscious contents
which we feel down below in our abdomen are slowly rising to the surface and becoming conscious, so that we begin to have the conviction:
this is definite, this is clear, this is really what we are after. As long as it was
down below in the abdomen it simply disturbed our functions; it was a
small germ. But now it is an embryo, or as it reaches the conscious, it is
slowly seen as a full-grown tree.
If you look at the symbol of the mÖlvdhvra in such a way, you understand the purpose of the yoga in the awakening of Kundalini. It means to
separate the gods from the world so that they become active, and with
25

LECTURE 2
that one starts the other order of things. From the standpoint of the gods
this world is less than child’s play; it is a seed in the earth, a mere potentiality. Our whole world of consciousness is only a seed of the future. And
when you succeed in the awakening of Kundalini, so that she begins to
move out of her mere potentiality, you necessarily start a world which is
a world of eternity, totally different from our world.
Here it will become clear why I speak at length about this whole
problem.
You remember that in our former seminars I always tried to point out
to you that the series of visions was an experience of a nonpersonal or
impersonal kind, and to explain to you why I was so particularly reticent
in speaking about the personal side of our patient; the personal side is
really perfectly negligible in comparison with her visions. Her visions
could be the visions of anybody, because they are impersonal, they correspond to the world of Kundalini and not to the world of mÖlvdhvra. They
are experiences which really mean the development of Kundalini and
not of Mrs. So-and-So. Sure enough, a very clever analyst would be able
to analyze out of that material a series of personal incidents in her life,
but it would be from only the mÖlvdhvra point of view, that is, our rational point of view of this world as the definite world. But from the
standpoint of the Kundalini yoga, that aspect is not interesting, because
it is merely accidental.2 mÖlvdhvra is the world of illusion from that other
point of view—as the world of the gods, the impersonal experience, is
naturally an illusion from the mÖlvdhvra psychology, the rational viewpoint of our world.
I insist upon this particular symbolism because it really can give you an
incomparable opportunity to understand what is meant by the impersonal experience, and by the peculiar duality, even duplicity, of the
human psychology, where two aspects form a bewildering crisscross. On
the one side the personal aspect, in which all the personal things are the
only meaningful things; and another psychology in which the personal
things are utterly uninteresting and valueless, futile, illusory. You owe it
to the existence of these two aspects that you have fundamental conflicts
at all, that you have the possibility of another point of view, so that you
2 When the seminar on visions resumed on 2 November, Jung reiterated this statement:
“You know I must refrain entirely from speaking of the personal life of our patient because
it leads nowhere; if you begin to think of her as a personal being it will lead you astray.
These visions are not to be understood in a personal way, for then it would be nothing but
the subjective foolishness of one person.” The Visions Seminar, vol. 7, 7. Clearly, the excursus on the psychology of Kundalini yoga was pedagogically intended to drive home this
point.

26

19 OCTOBER 1932
can criticize and judge, recognize and understand. For when you are just
one with a thing you are completely identical—you cannot compare it,
you cannot discriminate, you cannot recognize it. You must always have
a point outside if you want to understand. So people who have problematic natures with many conflicts are the people who can produce the
greatest understanding, because from their own problematical natures
they are enabled to see other sides and to judge by comparison. We
could not possibly judge this world if we had not also a standpoint outside, and that is given by the symbolism of religious experiences.
Now, if the yogin or the Western person succeeds in awakening Kundalini, what starts is not in any way a personal development, though of
course an impersonal development can influence the personal status, as
it does very often and very favorably. But it is not always so. What starts
are the impersonal happenings with which you should not identify. If
you do, you will soon feel obnoxious consequences—you will get an
inflation, you will get all wrong. That is one of the great difficulties in
experiencing the unconscious—that one identifies with it and becomes
a fool. You must not identify with the unconscious; you must keep outside, detached, and observe objectively what happens. But you then see
that all the events that happen in the impersonal, nonhuman order of
things have the very disagreeable quality that they cling to us, or we cling
to them. It is as if the Kundalini in its movement upward were pulling
us up with it, as if we were part of that movement, particularly in the
beginning.
It is true that we are a part, because we are then that which contains the
gods; they are germs in us, germs in the mÖlvdhvra, and when they begin
to move they have the effect of an earthquake which naturally shakes us,
and even shakes our houses down. When that upheaval comes, we are
carried with it, and naturally we might think we were moving upward.
But it makes, of course, a tremendous difference whether one flies, or
whether it is a wave or a great wind that lifts one. For to fly is one’s own
activity, and one can safely come down again, but when one is carried
upward, it is not under one’s control, and one will be put down after a
while in a most disagreeable way—then it means a catastrophe. So, you
see, it is wise not to identify with these experiences but to handle them
as if they were outside the human realm. That is the safest thing to do—
and really absolutely necessary. Otherwise you get an inflation, and inflation is just a minor form of lunacy, a mitigated term for it. And if you get
so absolutely inflated that you burst, it is schizophrenia.
Of course the idea of an impersonal, psychical experience is very
strange to us, and it is exceedingly difficult to accept such a thing, be27

LECTURE 2
cause we are so imbued with the fact that our unconscious is our own—
my unconscious, his unconscious, her unconscious—and our prejudice
is so strong that we have the greatest trouble disidentifying. Even if we
must recognize that there is a non-ego experience, it is a long way until
we realize what it might be. That is the reason why these experiences are
secret; they are called mystical because the ordinary world cannot understand them, and what they cannot understand they call mystical—that
covers everything. But the point is that what they call mystical is simply
not the obvious. Therefore the yoga way or the yoga philosophy has always been a secret, but not because people have kept it secret. For as soon
as you keep a secret it is already an open secret; you know about it and
other people know about it, and then it is no longer a secret. The real
secrets are secrets because nobody understands them. One cannot
even talk about them, and of such a kind are the experiences of the
Kundalini yoga. That tendency to keep things secret is merely a natural
consequence when the experience is of such a peculiar kind that you
had better not talk about it, for you expose yourself to the greatest misunderstanding and misinterpretation. Even if it is a matter of dogmatized experience of things that already have a certain form, you still feel,
as long as the original fresh impression of such an experience is alive,
that you had better continue to cover it up. You feel that these things will
not fit in, that they may have an almost destructive influence upon the
convictions of the mÖlvdhvra world.
For the convictions of the mÖlvdhvra world are very necessary. It is exceedingly important that you are rational, that you believe in the definiteness of our world, that this world is the culmination of history, the
most desirable thing. Such a conviction is absolutely vital. Otherwise you
remain detached from the mÖlvdhvra—you never get there, you are
never born, even. There are plenty of people who are not yet born. They
seem to be all here, they walk about—but as a matter of fact, they are not
yet born, because they are behind a glass wall, they are in the womb.
They are in the world only on parole and are soon to be returned to the
pleroma where they started originally. They have not formed a connection with this world; they are suspended in the air; they are neurotic,
living the provisional life. They say: “I am now living on such-and-such a
condition. If my parents behave according to my wishes, I stay. But if it
should happen that they do something I don’t like, I pop off.” You see,
that is the provisional life, a conditioned life, the life of somebody who
is still connected by an umbilical cord as thick as a ship’s rope to the
pleroma, the archetypal world of splendor. Now, it is most important
that you should be born; you ought to come into this world—otherwise
28

19 OCTOBER 1932
you cannot realize the self, and the purpose of this world has been
missed. Then you must simply be thrown back into the melting pot and
be born again.
The Hindus have an extremely interesting theory about that. I am not
strong on metaphysics, but I must admit that in metaphysics there is a
great deal of psychology. You see, it is utterly important that one should
be in this world, that one really fulfills one’s entelechia, the germ of life
which one is. Otherwise you can never start Kundalini; you can never
detach. You simply are thrown back, and nothing has happened; it is an
absolutely valueless experience. You must believe in this world, make
roots, do the best you can, even if you have to believe in the most absurd
things—to believe, for instance, that this world is very definite, that it
matters absolutely whether such-and-such a treaty is made or not. It may
be completely futile, but you have to believe in it, have to make it almost
a religious conviction, merely for the purpose of putting your signature
under the treaty, so that trace is left of you. For you should leave some
trace in this world which notifies that you have been here, that something has happened. If nothing happens of this kind you have not realized yourself; the germ of life has fallen, say, into a thick layer of air that
kept it suspended. It never touched the ground, and so never could produce the plant. But if you touch the reality in which you live, and stay for
several decades if you leave your trace, then the impersonal process can
begin. You see, the shoot must come out of the ground, and if the personal spark has never gotten into the ground, nothing will come out of
it; no li´ga or Kundalini will be there, because you are still staying in the
infinity that was before.
Now if, as I say, you succeed in completing your entelechia, that shoot
will come up from the ground; namely, that possibility of a detachment
from this world—from the world of Mvyv, as the Hindu would say—
which is a sort of depersonalization. For in mÖlvdhvra we are just identical. We are entangled in the roots, and we ourselves are the roots. We
make roots, we cause roots to be, we are rooted in the soil, and there is
no getting away for us, because we must be there as long as we live. That
idea, that we can sublimate ourselves and become entirely spiritual and
no hair left, is an inflation. I am sorry, that is impossible; it makes no
sense. Therefore we must invent a new scheme, and we speak of the impersonal. Other times may invent other terms for the same thing.
You know, in India they do not say “personal” and “impersonal,” “subjective” and “objective,” “ego” and “non-ego.” They speak of buddhi, personal consciousness, and Kundalini, which is the other thing; and they
never dream of identifying the two. They never think, “I myself am Kun29

LECTURE 2
dalini.” Quite the contrary, they can experience the divine because they
are so deeply conscious of the utter difference of God and man. We are
identical with it from the beginning because our gods, inasmuch as they
are not just conscious abstractions, are mere germs, or functions, let us
say. The divine thing in us functions as neuroses of the stomach, or of the
colon, or bladder—simply disturbances of the underworld. Our gods
have gone to sleep, and they stir only in the bowels of the earth.3 For our
conscious idea of God is abstract and remote. One hardly dares to speak
of it. It has become taboo, or it is such a worn-out coin that one can
hardly exchange it.
Well now, Kundalini yoga in its system of cakras symbolizes the development of that impersonal life. Therefore it is at the same time an initiation symbolism, and it is the cosmogonic myth. I will tell you one example. There is a Pueblo myth according to which man was generated far
down in the earth in a pitch-black cave. Then, after untold time of a
dormant and absolutely dark wormlike existence, two heavenly messengers came down and planted all the plants. Finally they found a cane
which was long enough to go through the opening in the roof and was
jointed like a ladder, so mankind could climb up and reach the floor of
the next cave; but it was still dark. Then, after a long time, they again
placed the cane under the roof and again climbed up and reached the
third cave. And so again, until finally they came to the fourth cave where
there was light, but an incomplete and ghostly light. That cave opened
out upon the surface of the earth, and for the first time they reached the
surface; but it was still dark. Then they learned to make a brilliant light,
out of which finally the sun and the moon were made.
You see, this myth depicts very beautifully how consciousness came to
pass, how it rises from level to level. Those were cakras, new worlds of
consciousness of natural growths, one above the other. And this is the
symbolism of all initiation cults: the awakening out of mÖlvdhvra, and the
going into the water, the baptismal fount with the danger of the makara,
the devouring quality or attribute of the sea.
Then, if you pass through that danger you reach the next center,
maõipÖra, which means the fullness of jewels. It is the fire center, really
the place where the sun rises. The sun now appears; the first light comes
after the baptism. This is like the initiation rites in the Isis mysteries,
3 In his “Commentary on ‘The Secret of the Golden Flower’ ” (1929) Jung wrote: “The
gods have become diseases; Zeus no longer rules Olympus but rather the solar plexus and
produces curious specimens for the doctor’s consulting room” (CW, vol. 13, §54). For a
reevaluation of this often-cited notion, see Wolfgang Giegerich, “Killings,” Spring: A Journal
of Archetype and Culture 54 (1993): 9–18.

30

19 OCTOBER 1932
according to Apuleius, where the initiate at the end of the ceremony was
put upon the pedestal and worshiped as the god Helios, the deification
that always follows the baptismal rite.4 You are born into a new existence;
you are a very different being and have a different name.
One sees all that very beautifully in the Catholic rite of baptism when
the godfather holds the child and the priest approaches with the burning candle and says: Dono tibi lucem eternam” (I give thee the eternal
light)—which means, I give you relatedness to the sun, to the God. You
receive the immortal soul, which you did not possess before; you are
then a “twice-born.” Christ receives his mission and the spirit of God in
his baptism in the Jordan. He is only a Christus after baptism because
Christus meant the anointed one. He too is “twice-born.” He is now
above the ordinary mortal that he was as Jesus, the son of the carpenter.
He is now a Christus, a nonpersonal or symbolic personality, no longer
a mere person belonging to this or that family. He belongs to the whole
world, and in his life it becomes evident that this is a very much more
important role than if he were the son of Joseph and Mary.
So maõipÖra is the center of the identification with the god, where one
becomes part of the divine substance, having an immortal soul. You are
already part of that which is no longer in time, in three-dimensional
space; you belong now to a fourth-dimensional order of things where
time is an extension, where space does not exist and time is not, where
there is only infinite duration—eternity.
This is a worldwide and ancient symbolism, not only in the Christian
baptism and the initiation in the Isis mysteries. For instance, in the religious symbolism of ancient Egypt, the dead Pharaoh goes to the underworld and embarks in the ship of the sun. You see, to approach divinity
means the escape from the futility of the personal existence and the
achieving of the eternal existence, the escape to a nontemporal form of
existence. The Pharaoh climbs into the sun bark and travels through the
night and conquers the serpent, and then rises again with the god, and
is riding over the heavens for all eternity. That idea spread in the later
centuries, so that even the nobles who were particularly friendly with the
Pharaoh succeeded in climbing into the ship of Ra. Therefore one finds
so many mummies buried in the tomb of the Pharaohs, the hope being
that all the bodies in the tombs would rise with him. I saw something very
touching in a newly excavated tomb in Egypt. Just before they had
locked up the tomb of this particular noble, one of the workmen had put
a little baby that had recently died, in a miserable little basket of reeds
4 Lucius Apuleius, The Golden Ass, translated by Robert Graves (London, 1950), 286.

31

LECTURE 2
with a few poor little pieces of cloth, right inside the door, so that the
baby—who was probably his child—would rise with the noble on the
great day of judgment. He was quite satisfied with his own futility, but his
baby, at least, should reach the sun. So this third center is rightly called
the fullness of jewels. It is the great wealth of the sun, the never-ending
abundance of divine power to which man attains through baptism.
But of course, that is all symbolism. We come now to the psychological
interpretation, which is not as easy as the symbolic or comparative
method.5 It is far less easy to understand maõipÖra from a psychological
point of view. If one dreams of baptism, of going into the bath or into the
water, you know what it means when people are in actual analysis: that
they are being pushed into the unconscious to be cleansed; they must
get into the water for the sake of renewal. But it remains dark what follows after the bath. It is very difficult to explain in psychological terms
what will follow when you have made your acquaintance with the unconscious. Have you an idea? Mind you, this question is not easy to answer,
because you will be inclined to give an abstract answer, for a psychological reason.
Dr. Reichstein: You could say that the old world is burning down.
Dr. Jung: That is not just abstract, but it is very universal and at a safe
distance.
Dr. Reichstein: The old conventional forms and ideas are breaking
down.
Dr. Jung: Oh yes, our philosophy of the world may be changed tremendously, but that is no proof that you have reached maõipÖra.
Dr. Reichstein: But is not maõipÖra a symbol of fire, of things burned?
Dr. Jung: Well, it is not just a destructive symbol; it means more a
source of energy. But you are quite right—there is always a note of destruction when one speaks of fire; the mere mention of fire is enough to
rouse the idea of destruction. And there you touch upon that fear that
causes abstraction; we easily get abstract when we do not want to touch
a thing that is too hot.
Miss Hannah: Is one not able, then, to see the opposites at the same
time?
Dr. Jung: Yes, that is nicely put, very abstract, but you could designate
it more completely.
Mrs. Sawyer: In the visions, the patient came to the place where she had
to stand the fire, and then the stars fell down.6 So the impersonal things
began.
5 The contrast is to Hauer’s method of interpretation.
6 See The Visions Seminar, vol. 5, 9 March 1932, 114.

32

19 OCTOBER 1932
Dr. Jung: Quite so—there we have a connection.
Dr. Bertine: Is it not a capacity for living more fully? A greater intensity
of conscious living?
Dr. Jung: We think we are living quite consciously and with great intensity. What is the next effect when you become acquainted with the unconscious and take it seriously? You see you are inclined not to take it
seriously and to invent an apotropaic theory that is “nothing but”—nothing but infantile memories or inhibited wishes, for instance. Why do you
accept such a theory? In reality it is something quite different.
Mrs. Crowley: It is becoming acquainted with the shadow part.
Dr. Jung: That is also conveniently put, but what does it mean?
Mrs. Sigg: Isolation.
Dr. Jung: That might be the consequence of it, but first of all it is just
the horrible thing that leads into isolation, just the opposite.
Mrs. Crowley: Desirousness, all that shadow part of yourself.
Dr. Jung: Yes, desire, passions, the whole emotional world breaks loose.
Sex, power, and every devil in our nature gets loose when we become
acquainted with the unconscious. Then you will suddenly see a new picture of yourself. That is why people are afraid and say there is no unconscious, like children playing hide-and-seek. A child goes behind a door
and says, “Nobody is behind this door; don’t look here!” And so we have
two marvelous psychological theories that nothing is behind this door,
don’t look here, this is nothing important.7 Those are apotropaic theories. But you will see that there is something, you must admit that there
are such powers. Then you make an abstraction, you make marvelous
abstract signs of it, and talk of it with only a sort of shy hinting. You speak
euphemistically. As sailors never dared to say, “This damned hell of a sea,
this black sea that is always so stormy and smashes our ships!” They said,
“The welcoming benevolent sea . . .”—in order not to arouse those
alarming impressions, or to irritate those dark wind demons. Instead of
saying the archbishop of Canterbury, you say His Grace. You don’t say
the pope has issued a very foolish encyclica, you say the Vatican. Or instead of speaking of those hellish liars, you say Wilhelmstraße, or Downing Street, or the Quai d’Orsay. That is the euphemistic abstract way of
putting things. Our science has the same purpose in using Latin or
Greek words. It is a marvelous shield against the demons—the demons
are afraid of Greek because they do not understand it. And therefore we
talk, as you have just demonstrated, in such an abstract way.
So it is just that—you get into the world of fire, where things become
red-hot. After baptism you get right into hell—that is the enantiodromia.
7 The reference is to Freud’s psychoanalysis and Adler’s individual psychology.

33

LECTURE 2
And now comes the paradox of the East: it is also the fullness of jewels.
But what is passion, what are emotions? There is the source of fire, there
is the fullness of energy. A man who is not on fire is nothing: he is ridiculous, he is two-dimensional. He must be on fire even if he does make a
fool of himself. A flame must burn somewhere, otherwise no light shines;
there is no warmth, nothing. It is terribly awkward, sure enough; it is
painful, full of conflict, apparently a mere waste of time—at all events, it
is against reason. But that accursed Kundalini says, “It is the fullness of
jewels; there is the source of energy.” As Heraclitus aptly said: war is the
father of all things.
Now this third center, the center of emotions, is localized in the plexus
solaris, or the center of the abdomen. I have told you that my first discovery about the Kundalini yoga was that these cakras really are concerned
with what are called psychical localizations. This center then would be
the first psychical localization that is within our conscious psychical experience. I must refer again to the story of my friend, the Pueblo chief, who
thought that all Americans were crazy because they were convinced that
they thought in the head. He said: “But we think in the heart.” That is
anvhata.8 Then there are primitive tribes who have their psychical localization in the abdomen. And that is true of us as well; there is a certain
category of psychical events that take place in the stomach. Therefore
one says, “Something weighs on my stomach.” And if one is very angry,
one gets jaundice; if one is afraid, one has diarrhea; or if in a particularly
obstinate mood, one is constipated. You see, that shows what psychical
localization means.
Thinking in the abdomen means that there was once a time when consciousness was so dim that people noticed only the things that disturbed
their intestinal functions, and everything else simply passed by the
board; it did not exist because it had no effect upon them. There are still
traces of that among the central Australian aborigines, who have the funniest ceremonies in order to make them realize a thing. I told you about
the ceremony of making a man angry; and one sees other forms of the
same thing in all primitive tribes. Before they can make up their minds
to go hunting, for instance, there must be a whole ceremonial by which
they are put into the mood of hunting; otherwise they don’t do it. They
must be excited by something. It has to do not only with the intestines,
then, but with the whole body.
Therefore that primitive method of the schoolmasters fifty years ago,
8 Hauer described the anvhata cakra as “the heart lotus, which means the one that has
not or cannot be hurt” (HS, 69).

34

19 OCTOBER 1932
which I myself have experienced. We were taught the ABCs with a whip.
We were eight boys sitting on one bench, and the schoolmaster had a
whip of three willow wands, just long enough to touch all the backs at
once. He said, “This is A” (bang), “This is B” (bang). You see, causing a
physical sensation was the old method of teaching. It was not very painful, because when he beat on eight backs at the same time you just
cringed and didn’t feel it very much. But it makes an impression; the
boys were actually sitting up and listening. That was instead of “Will you
be kind enough to pay attention, please?” Then nobody listens; they
think he is a damned fool. But when he cracks the whip over them and
says, “That is A,” then they get it.
It is for the same reason that primitives inflict wounds in initiations
when they hand over the secrets, the mystical teaching of the tribe. At
the same time they cause intense pain: they make cuts and rub ashes into
them, or they starve the initiants, they don’t let them sleep, or frighten
them out of their wits. Then they give the teaching, and it catches hold
of them because it has gone in with physical discomfort or pain.
Now, as I said, the first psychical localization that is conscious to us is
the abdomen; we are not conscious of anything deeper. I don’t know of
a trace in primitive psychology where people would locate their psyche
in their bladder. Then the next is the heart, which is a very definite center that still functions with us. For instance we say, “You know it in the
head, but you don’t know it in the heart.” There is an extraordinary distance from the head to the heart, a distance of ten, twenty, thirty years,
or a whole lifetime. For you can know something in the head for forty
years and it may never have touched the heart. But only when you have
realized it in the heart do you begin to take notice of it. And from the
heart it is an equally long distance down to the plexus solaris, and then
you are caught. For there you have no freedom at all. There is no air
substance: you are just bones and blood and muscles; you are in the intestines; you are functioning there like a worm with no head. But in the
heart you are on the surface. The diaphragm would be about the surface
of the earth. As long as you are in maõipÖra you are in the terrible heat
of the center of the earth, as it were. There is only the fire of passion, of
wishes, of illusions. It is the fire of which Buddha speaks in his sermon in
Benares where he says, The whole world is in flames, your ears, your eyes,
everywhere you pour out the fire of desire, and that is the fire of illusion
because you desire things which are futile. Yet there is the great treasure
of the released emotional energy.
So when people become acquainted with the unconscious they often
get into an extraordinary state—they flare up, they explode, old buried
35

LECTURE 2
emotions come up, they begin to weep about things which happened
forty years ago. That simply means that they were prematurely detached
from that stage of life; they have forgotten that there are buried fires still
burning. Then they were unconscious, but when they touch the lower
centers, they get back into that world and become aware that it is still
hot, like a fire that has been left forgotten under the ashes. But take away
the ashes and there are still the glowing embers underneath, as it is said
of pilgrims going to Mecca: they leave their fires buried under the ashes,
and when they return the following year the embers are still glowing.
Now, in maõipÖra you have reached an upper layer where there comes
a definite change.9 The bodily localization of this cakra under the diaphragm is the symbol for the peculiar change that now takes place.
Above the diaphragm you come into anvhata, the heart or air center,
because the heart is embedded in the lungs and the whole activity of the
heart is closely associated with the lungs. One must be naive to understand these things. In primitive experience, it is the same thing. In fact,
it is a physiological truth. We understand more or less what maõipÖra
means psychologically, but now we come to the great leap, anvhata.
What follows psychologically after you have fallen into hell? When you
have come into the whirlpool of passions, of instincts, of desires and so
on, what follows after?
Mrs. Crowley: Usually an enantiodromia; some opposite will now be
constellated. Some vision perhaps, or something more impersonal will
follow.
Dr. Jung: An enantiodromia, which would be the discovery of something impersonal? In other words, that one no longer identifies with
one’s desires. Now, one must consider the fact that it is hard to talk of
these things, because most people are still identical with maõipÖra. It is
exceedingly difficult to find out what is beyond. Therefore we must remain a bit in the symbolism first. The next center, as I told you, has to do
with the air. The diaphragm would correspond to the surface of the
earth, and apparently in getting into anvhata we reach the condition
where we are lifted up from the earth. What has happened? How do we
get there at all? You see in maõipÖra we still don’t know where we are; we
are in mÖlvdhvra just as well, at least our feet are still standing in
mÖlvdhvra: but in anvhata they are lifted up above the surface of the
earth. Now, what could literally lift one above the earth?
Dr. Meier: The wind.
9 In the manuscript “Die Beschreibung der beidem Centrem Shat-chakra Nirupana”
Jung described maõipÖra as “center of corporeal men, carnivores” (2; my translation).

36

19 OCTOBER 1932
Dr. Jung: Yes, that would be within the symbolism, but there is another
thing that would make it a bit plainer.
Dr. Bertine: A sort of distillation?
Dr. Jung: That is a good idea, which leads us right away into alchemistic
symbolism. The alchemist calls this process sublimation. But to remain
in the symbolism of which we were speaking today?
Mr. Allemann: The sun rises above the horizon.
Dr. Jung: Yes, you rise above the horizon according to the Egyptian
symbolism. If you are identical with the sun, you rise above the horizon
with the sun ship and travel over the heavens. The sun is a superior
power. If you are an appendix of the Pharaoh, the sun can lift you up to
almost a divine position. And the contact with the sun in maõipÖra lifts
you up off your feet into the sphere above the earth. The wind also can
do it, because in primitive beliefs the spirit is a kind of wind.
Therefore in many languages there is the same word for wind and
spirit, spiritus for instance, and spirare means to blow or breathe. Animus,
spirit, comes from the Greek anemos, wind; and pneuma, spirit, is also a
Greek word for wind. In Arabic ruch is the wind or soul of the spirit; and
in Hebrew ruach means spirit and wind. The connection between wind
and spirit is due to the fact that the spirit was thought originally to be the
breath, the air one breathes out or expires. With a person’s last breath
his spirit leaves the body. So it would be either a magic wind or the sun
that lifts you up. And where do we find the two things coming together?
Perhaps you still remember in analytical literature that very interesting
case.
Mrs. Sawyer: Is it the primitives blowing on their hands and worshiping
the sunrise?
Dr. Jung: That is identification with the sun. It is not the same, you see,
but I have published an example of the wind and the sun being the same.
Mr. Baumann: The sun is sometimes the origin of the wind.
Dr. Jung: Yes. You remember the case of the insane man who saw a sort
of tube hanging down from the sun. He called it the “sun phallus,” and
it caused the wind. That shows that the sun and the wind are the same.10
10 In Transformations and Symbols of the Libido (1912), Jung cited his pupil Johann Honegger’s discovery of a patient’s hallucination: “The patient sees in the sun a so-called ‘upright tail’ (i.e., much like an erect penis). When the patient moves his head back and forth,
the sun’s penis also moves back and forth, and from this the wind arises. This strange delusionary idea remained unintelligible to us for a long time, until I became acquainted with
the visions of the Mithraic liturgy.” Psychology of the Unconscious, in CW B, §173; translation
modified. In 1927 Jung stated that he made this observation in 1906 and came across
Albrecht Dietrich’s Eine Mithrasliturgie (A Mithras liturgy) (Leipzig, 1903) in 1910, which
ruled out the possibility of cryptomnesia (the revival of forgotten memories) or telepathy

37

LECTURE 2
Mr. Baumann: I think there is a Greek myth, where you hear voices
before the sun has risen.
Dr. Jung: That is the figure of Memnon in Egypt, which was said to
produce a peculiar sound when the sun rises, because according to the
Greek legend Memnon is the son of Aurora, the dawn, so when dawn
appears he greets his mother. But that is not exactly the wind and the
sun. You see, the symbolism tells us what happens in anvhata. But that is
not psychological; we are really in mythology so far, and we ought to
know what it means psychologically. How do you get lifted up above the
maõipÖra center, above the world of your mere emotions?
Miss Hannah: You get an inflation, and you identify with the god.
Dr. Jung: That might be, it is very inflating, but we are speaking here of
the normal case. We are supposing that sequence of the Kundalini is a
normal sequence, because it is the condensation of the experiences of
perhaps thousands of years.
Mr. Baumann: When you are very emotional you try to express yourself, for instance, by music or poetry.
Dr. Jung: You mean it produces a certain utterance. But emotions always produce utterances. You can manifest all sorts of things when you
are still caught in your emotions. It must be something above the emotions.
Mrs. Mehlich: Is it that one begins to think?
Dr. Jung: Exactly.
Dr. Reichstein: It is said that here the puruüa11 is born, so it would be
here that the first idea of the self is seen more completely.
Dr. Jung: Yes, but how would that show in psychology? We must try now
to bring the thing down to psychological facts.
Dr. Reichstein: That we become conscious of something which is not
personal at this point.
Dr. Jung: Yes, you begin to reason, to think, to reflect about things, and
so it is the beginning of a sort of contraction or withdrawal from the
mere emotional function. Instead of following your impulses wildly, you
and hence provided evidence for the collective unconscious. The editors noted that Jung
subsequently learned that the 1910 edition was the second edition, and that the original
had actually been published in 1903. They added that the patient had been committed
prior to 1903. CW, vol. 8, §§319–21.
11 Woodroffe defined puruüa as “a center of limited consciousness—limited by the associated Prakùti and its products of Mind and Matter. Popularly by Puruüa . . . is meant sentient
being with body and senses—that is, organic life.” Arthur Avalon (pseud. Sir John
Woodroffe), The Serpent Power (London, 1919), 49. Surendranath Dasgupta defined
puruüa as spirit (Yoga as Philosophy and Religion [London, 1924], 3) and as “consciousness
itself” (ibid., 173).

38

19 OCTOBER 1932
begin to invent a certain ceremony that allows you to disidentify yourself
from your emotions, or to overcome your emotions actually. You stop
yourself in your wild mood and suddenly ask, “Why am I behaving like
this?”
We find the symbolism for that in this center. In anvhata you behold
the puruüa, a small figure that is the divine self, namely, that which is not
identical with mere causality, mere nature, a mere release of energy that
runs down blindly with no purpose.12 People lose themselves completely
in their emotions and deplete themselves, and finally they are burned to
bits and nothing remains—just a heap of ashes, that is all. The same
thing occurs in lunacy: people get into a certain state and cannot get out
of it. They burn up in their emotions and explode. There is a possibility
that one detaches from it, however, and when a man discovers this, he
really becomes a man. Through maõipÖra he is in the womb of nature,
extraordinarily automatic; it is merely a process. But in anvhata a new
thing comes up, the possibility of lifting himself above the emotional
happenings and beholding them. He discovers the puruüa in his heart,
the thumbling, “Smaller than small, and greater than great.”13 In the
center of anvhata there is again åiva in the form of the li´ga, and the
small flame means the first germlike appearance of the self.
Mr. Dell: Is the process you describe the beginning of individuation in
psychological terms?
Dr. Jung: Yes. It is the withdrawal from the emotions; you are no longer
identical with them. If you succeed in remembering yourself, if you succeed in making a difference between yourself and that outburst of passion, then you discover the self; you begin to individuate. So in anvhata
individuation begins. But here again you are likely to get an inflation.
Individuation is not that you become an ego—you would then become
an individualist. You know, an individualist is a man who did not succeed
in individuating; he is a philosophically distilled egotist. Individuation is
becoming that thing which is not the ego, and that is very strange. Therefore nobody understands what the self is, because the self is just the thing
which you are not, which is not the ego. The ego discovers itself as being
a mere appendix of the self in a sort of loose connection. For the ego is
12 In his commentary on Patanjali’s Yoga Sutras, Jung stated, concerning the translation
of the term puruüa, “Deussen designates [it] as ‘das von allem Objectiven freie Subject des
Erkennens’ [the subject of knowledge freed from everything objective]. I doubt this definition—it is too logical, and the East is not logical; it is observant and intuitive. So it is better
to describe the puruüa as primeval man or as the luminous man.” Modern Psychology 3,
121.
13 Katha Upanisad 2.20–21; cited also in CW, vol. 6, §329, where puruüa is rendered as
“Self.”

39

LECTURE 2
always far down in mÖlvdhvra and suddenly becomes aware of something
up above in the fourth story, in anvhata, and that is the self.
Now, if anybody makes the mistake of thinking that he lives at the
same time in the basement and on the fourth story, that he is the puruüa
himself, he is crazy. He is what the German very aptly call verrückt, carried
off his feet up to somewhere else. He just sits up there and spins. We are
allowed to behold only the puruüa, to behold his feet up there. But we are
not the puruüa; that is a symbol that expresses the impersonal process.
The self is something exceedingly impersonal, exceedingly objective. If
you function in your self you are not yourself—that is what you feel. You
have to do it as if you were a stranger: you will buy as if you did not buy;
you will sell as if you did not sell. Or, as St. Paul expresses it, “But it is not
I that lives, it is Christ that liveth in me,” meaning that his life had become an objective life, not his own life but the life of a greater one, the
puruüa.
All the primitive tribes that are on a somewhat higher level of civilization usually have discovered anvhata. That is, they begin to reason, and
to judge; they are no longer quite wild. They have elaborate ceremonies—the more primitive they are the more elaborate are the ceremonies. They need them in order to prevent maõipÖra psychology. They
have invented all sorts of things, magic circles, forms for the palavers, for
the intercourse of people; all those peculiar ceremonials are special psychological techniques to prevent an explosion of maõipÖra. In a palaver
with primitives it is simply de rigueur that you do certain things—to us,
perfectly superfluous things—but you can do nothing with the primitives
unless you observe the rules.
For instance, there must be an unmistakable hierarchy; therefore the
man who calls the palaver must be a man of power. If I call a palaver, I
must have a stool, and the other people are on the ground; they must sit
down immediately. The chief has men with whips who whip everybody
down if they don’t sit down at once. And then one does not begin to talk.
One first hands around presents—matches, cigarettes—and the chief
necessarily must have many more cigarettes than his subjects, because
the hierarchy of that moment must be emphasized to show that there is
authority on top.14 That is all ceremony against maõipÖra, and only when
that is silently done can the man who calls the palaver begin to speak. I
say that I have a shauri, a business. That is the beginning. You see, I must
speak a mantra by which everybody is caught—nobody is allowed to talk;
everybody listens. Then I say my shauri, after which my partner, with
14 For Jung’s account of his palavers among the Elgonyi in Kenya in 1925–26, which
overlaps with his description here, see MDR, 293–97.

40

19 OCTOBER 1932
whom I have to deal, talks too, but in a very low voice, hardly audible,
and he shall not get up. If a man speaks too loudly, somebody comes with
a whip. He may not speak loudly, because that would show emotion, and
as soon as there is emotion, there is danger of fighting and killing.
Therefore no weapons are allowed. Also, when the palaver ends one
must say shauri kisha, meaning, “Now the palaver is finished.”
I once got up before I had said that, and my headman came quite
excitedly to me and said, “Now, don’t get up!” And then I said shauri
kisha, and everything was all right. If I said a mantra, I could go. I must
say that the whole magic circle is now dissolved, and then I can go without rousing the suspicion that somebody is offended or in a wild mood.
Otherwise it is dangerous, then there might be anything, perhaps murder, for one is getting up obviously because one is crazy. It sometimes
happens that they get so excited in their dances that they begin to kill.
For instance, those two cousins Sarasin, who made the exploration in
Celebes, were almost killed by men who were really very friendly with
them.15 They were showing them the war dances, and they got so much
in the mood of war, so frenzied, that they threw their spears at them. It
was sheer luck that they escaped.
You see, anvhata is still very feeble, and maõipÖra psychology is quite
close to us. We still have to be polite to people to avoid the explosions of
maõipÖra.
15 Paul and Fritz Sarasin published an account of their anthropological expeditions in
Reisen in Celebes ausgeführt in den Jahren 1893–1896 und 1902–1903 (Travels in Celebes
taken in the years 1893–1896 and 1902–1903), 2 vols. (Wiesbaden, 1905).

41

LECTURE 3

LECTURE 3
26 October 1932

Dr. Jung: I will continue our discussion of the cakras. You remember,
we were speaking chiefly of the transformation from maõipÖra to
anvhata. In anvhata something is attained which was begun in mulvdhvra, through a series of four stages. How might these four stages also
be designated?
Dr. Reichstein: They are the four elements.
Dr. Jung: Exactly. Each of the four lower centers has an element belonging to it—mÖlvdhvra, the earth, svvdhiü°hvna, the water, then comes
fire in maõipÖra, and finally air in anvhata. So one can see the whole
thing as a sort of transformation of elements, with the increase of volatility—of volatile substance. And the next form we reach is viçuddha,1
which is the ether center. Now, what is ether? Do you know anything
about it from the physical point of view?
Remark: It penetrates everything.
Mrs. Sawyer: You cannot catch it.
Dr. Jung: Why not? Since it penetrates everywhere, why can it not be
found everywhere?
Mr. Dell: It cannot be measured; it is a thought.
Dr. Jung: Yes, one finds it only within one’s brain, nowhere else; it is a
concept of substance that has none of the qualities that matter should
have. It is matter that is not matter, and such a thing must necessarily be
a concept. Now, in the viçuddha center—beyond the four elements—one
reaches what stage?
Mrs. Crowley: A more conscious state, abstract thought perhaps?
Dr. Jung: Yes, one reaches a sphere of abstraction. There one steps
beyond the empirical world, as it were, and lands in a world of concepts.
And what are concepts? What do we call the substance of concepts?
Mrs. Crowley: Psychology?
Dr. Jung: Or say psychical psychology; that would express the science
1 Hauer described the viçuddha cakra as “the cleansed one, or cleansing” (HS, 69).

42

26 OCTOBER 1932
of psychical things. The reality we reach there is a psychical reality; it is
a world of psychical substance, if we can apply such a term. I think we get
nearest to it when we say it is a world of psychical reality. So another
point of view to explain the series of the cakras would be a climbing up
from gross matter to the subtle, psychical matter. Now, the idea of this
transformation from earth to ether is one of the oldest constituents of
Hindu philosophy. The concept of the five elements is a part of the
Samkhya philosophy, which is pre-Buddhistic, belonging to the seventh
century B.C. at the latest. All subsequent Hindu philosophies, like the
Upanisads, took their origin in the Samkhya philosophy. So this concept
of the five elements dates back endlessly—there is no way of telling its
age. One sees from the age of that component that the fundamental
ideas of tantric yoga reach back into a dim past. Also the idea of the
transformation of the elements shows the analogy of tantric yoga with
our medieval alchemistic philosophy. There one finds exactly the same
ideas, the transformation of the gross matter into the subtle matter of
the mind—the sublimation of man, as it was then understood.
Speaking of this alchemistic aspect of the cakras, I want to call your
attention to the symbol of maõipÖra, the fire center. You remember, perhaps, that in the fire center there are those peculiar handles, one could
call them, which Professor Hauer hypothetically explained as parts of
the swastika.2 Now, I must confess that I never have seen a swastika symbol that had only three feet. There is the Greek form of the triskelos, but
I don’t know whether that existed in India. It was found on Greek coins
in Sicily, from a period between four hundred and about two hundred
B.C.—when Sicily belonged to Graecia Magna and was a large and flourishing Greek colony. The triskelos is like this: the three-legged being. But
the swastika is like this: running on four feet. So I suggest that these
might be handles attached to the triangle of maõipÖra. I rather think that
they are handles of a pot—to lift the pot—and there is a lid on top which
has also a handle. I think that is probably to be explained from the alchemistic aspect, because maõipÖra is the fire region, and that is the
kitchen, or the stomach, where the food is cooked. One stuffs the food
into the pot, or into the belly, and there it is heated by the blood. In that
way food is prepared so that one can digest it.
Cooking is an anticipation of digestion, a sort of predigestion. For example, in Africa the papaya tree has the very peculiar quality that its fruit
and leaves are full of pepsin, the same stuff which is found in the juice of
the stomach, the digestive stuff par excellence. The Negroes wrap up
2 Ibid., 75.

43

LECTURE 3
their meat for two or three hours in papaya leaves instead of cooking
it—it thus becomes partially digested; it is predigested. And so the whole
art of cooking is predigestion. We have transferred part of our digestive
ability into the kitchen, so the kitchen is the stomach of every house, and
the labor of preparing the food is then taken away from our stomachs.
Our mouth is also a predigestive organ, because the saliva contains a
digestive substance. The mechanical action of the teeth is predigestive,
because we cut up the food, which is what we also do in the kitchen in
cutting up the vegetables, and so on. So you could really say that the
kitchen is a digestive tract projected from the human body. And it is the
alchemistic place where things are transformed.
Therefore maõipÖra would be a center in which substances are digested, transformed. The next thing one would expect would be the
transformation shown as completed. As a matter of fact, this center is
right below the diaphragm, which marks the dividing line between
anvhata and the centers of the abdomen.
For after maõipÖra follows anvhata,3 in which entirely new things
occur; a new element is there, air, no longer gross matter. Even fire is
understood to be in a way gross matter. It is thicker, denser than air, and
it is quite visible, whereas air is invisible. Fire is exceedingly movable, yet
perfectly well defined, and also in a way tangible, whereas air is exceedingly light and almost intangible—unless you feel it as a wind. It is relatively gentle in comparison with fire, which moves and burns.
So at the diaphragm you cross the threshold from the visible tangible
things to the almost invisible intangible things. And these invisible things
in anvhata are the psychical things, for this is the region of what is called
feeling and mind. The heart is characteristic of feeling, and air is characteristic of thought. It is the breath-being; therefore one has always identified the soul and thought with breath.
For instance, it is the custom in India, when the father dies, that the
oldest son must watch during the last moments in order to inhale the last
breath of his father, which is the soul, in order to continue his life. The
Swahili word roho means the stertorous breathing of a dying man, which
we call in German röcheln; and roho also means the soul. It is no doubt
taken from the Arabic word ruch, which means wind, breath, spirit, with
probably the same original idea of stertorous breathing. So the original
idea of spirit or of psychical things is the idea of breath or air. And I told
you that the mind in Latin is animus, which is identical with the Greek
word ánemos meaning wind.
3 Hauer stated of the anvhata cakra: “This heart lotus is the cakra of the fundamental
insights into life; it is what we call the creative life in the highest sense” (HS, 90–91).

44

26 OCTOBER 1932
The heart is always characteristic of feeling because feeling conditions
influence the heart. Everywhere in the world feelings are associated with
the heart. If you have no feelings, you have no heart; if you have no courage, you have no heart, because courage is a definite feeling condition.
And you say, “Take it to heart.” Or you learn something “by heart.” You
learn it, of course, by the head but you won’t keep it in mind unless you
take it to heart. Only if you learn a thing by heart do you really get it. In
other words, if it is not associated with your feelings, if it has not sunk
into your body until it reaches the anvhata center, it is so volatile that it
flies away. It must be associated with the lower center in order to be kept.
Therefore that method of teaching pupils that I described to you last
week, where the teacher used the whip, in order that their feelings of
anger and suffering would make the pupils remember the letters. If they
were not associated with pain, they would not keep them. That is particularly true for the primitive man: he learns nothing if not in such a way.
The real importance of thoughts and values becomes clear to us only
when we consider them as compelling forces in our lives. The beginning
of such a recognition of such values and thoughts in primitives would be
embodied in the secret teaching of the tribe, which is given at the time
of the puberty initiations together with pain and torture to make them
remember it. At the same time they are taught certain moral values,
which prevent the mere blind action of the maõipÖra fires of passion.
So anvhata is really the center where psychical things begin, the recognition of values and ideas. When man has reached that level in civilization or in his individual development one could say he was in anvhata,
and there he gets the first inkling of the power and substantiality, or the
real existence, of psychical things.
For instance, take a patient in analysis who has reached the stage of
maõipÖra, where he is an absolute prey to his emotions and passions. I
say: “But you really ought to be a bit reasonable; don’t you see what you
do? You cause no end of trouble to your relations.” And it makes no
impression whatever. But then these arguments begin to have a pull; one
knows that the threshold of the diaphragm is crossed—he has reached
anvhata. You see, values, convictions, general ideas are psychical facts
that are nowhere to be met with in natural science. One cannot catch
them with a butterfly net, nor can one find them under microscopes.
They become visible only in anvhata. Now according to tantric yoga, the
puruüa is first seen in anvhata: the essence of man, the supreme man, the
so-called primordial man then becomes visible. So puruüa is identical
with the psychical substance of thought and value, feeling. In the recognition of feelings and of ideas one sees the puruüa. That is the first inkling of a being within your psychological or psychical existence that is
45

LECTURE 3
not yourself—a being in which you are contained, which is greater and
more important than you but which has an entirely psychical existence.
You see, we could finish here; we could say that about covers the
growth of humanity. As we are all convinced that psychical things have a
certain weight, mankind as a whole has about reached anvhata. For instance, the great war has taught practically everybody that the things that
have the greatest weight are the imponderabilia, the things you cannot
possibly weigh, like public opinion or psychical infection. The whole war
was a psychical phenomenon. If you are looking for the causal root of it,
it could not possibly be explained as arising out of the reason of man or
out of economic necessity. One could say that Germany needed a
greater expansion and had to go to war, or that France felt threatened
and had to crush Germany. But nobody was threatened—everybody had
enough money, the German exports were increasing from year to year,
Germany had all the expansion she needed. All the economic reasons
you mention are no good at all; they don’t explain that phenomenon. It
was simply the time when that thing had to happen from unknown psychical reasons. Any great movement of man has always started from psychical reasons; so it is our experience that has taught us to believe in the
psychical. Therefore we are rightly afraid of mob psychology, for instance. Every man of today will take that into account. And formerly man
did not believe in the value of advertising; now look what is done with
it! Or would anybody have believed that the little sheets which appeared
every fortnight—gazettes, which we now call newspapers—would be
a world power? The press is recognized as a world power today; it is a
psychical fact.
So we can say that our civilization has reached the state of anvhata—we
have overcome the diaphragm. We no longer locate the mind in the diaphragm, as the Old Greeks did in Homeric times. We are convinced that
the seat of consciousness must be somewhere up in the head. We already
have a more farsighted view in anvhata; we become aware of the puruüa.
But we do not yet trust the security of psychical existence, so we have not
reached viçuddha. We still believe in a material world built of matter and
psychical force. And we cannot connect the psychical existence or substance with the idea of anything cosmic or physical. We have not yet
found the bridge between the ideas of physics and psychology.4
Therefore collectively we have not crossed the distance between
4 Jung attempted such a bridge in his collaboration with the physicist Wolfgang Pauli in
The Interpretation of Nature and the Psyche (Bollingen Series LI, 1955). On this issue, see especially Wolfgang Pauli und C. G. Jung: Ein Briefwechsel 1932–1958, edited by C. A. Meier (Berlin, 1992).

46

26 OCTOBER 1932
anvhata and viçuddha. So if one speaks of viçuddha, it is of course with a
certain hesitation. We are stepping into the slippery future right away
when we try to understand what that might mean. For in viçuddha we
reach beyond our actual conception of the world, in a way we reach the
ether region. We are trying something that would be more than Professor Piccard achieved!5 He was only in the stratosphere—he reached
something exceedingly thin, I admit, but it was not yet ether. So we have
to construct a sort of skyrocket of very large dimensions which shoots us
up into space. It is the world of abstract ideas and values, the world
where the psyche is in itself, where the psychical reality is the only reality,
or where matter is a thin skin around an enormous cosmos of psychical
realities, really the illusory fringe around the real existence, which is
psychical.
The concept of the atom, for instance, might be considered as corresponding to the abstract thinking of the viçuddha center. Moreover, if
our experience should reach such a level, we would get an extraordinary
vista of the puruüa. For then the puruüa becomes really the center of
things; it is no longer a pale vision, it is the ultimate reality, as it were. You
see, that world will be reached when we succeed in finding a symbolical
bridge between the most abstract ideas of physics and the most abstract
ideas of analytical psychology. If we can construct that bridge then we
will have reached at least the outer gate of viçuddha. That is the condition. I mean, we will then have reached it collectively; the way will then
be opened. But we are still a long distance from that goal. For viçuddha
means just what I said: a full recognition of the psychical essences or
substances as the fundamental essences of the world, and by virtue not of
speculation but of fact, namely as experience. It does not help to speculate
about vjñv and sahasrvra6 and God knows what; you can reflect upon
those things, but you are not there if you have not had the experience.
I will give you an example of the transition from one state to another.
5 Auguste Piccard was a Swiss professor of physics at the University of Brussels. Commencing on 27 May 1931, he ascended for the first time into the stratosphere by means of
a special balloon to make scientific observations. His second flight was from the Dübendorf
aerodrome near Zurich on 18 August 1932. See his Au dessus des nuages (Above the clouds)
(Paris, 1933) and Between Earth and Sky, translated by C. Apcher (London, 1950).
6 Hauer stated that the sahasrvra cakra “is the thousand-spoked or the thousand-petaled
cakra” (HS, 69). Eliade noted that “it is here that the final union (unmanz) of åiva and åakti,
the final goal of tantric svdhana, is realized, and here the kuõìalinz ends its journey after
traversing the six cakras. We should note that the sahasrvra no longer belongs to the plane
of the body, that it already designates the plane of transcendence—and this explains why
writers usually speak of the ‘six’ cakras.” In Mircea Eliade, Yoga: Immortality and Freedom,
translated by Willard R. Trask (Bollingen Series LVI; reprint, London, 1989), 243.

47

LECTURE 3
I remember the case of a man who was an extrovert in the most exaggerated sense of the word. He was always convinced that the world was best
wherever he was not; there was the real bliss, and he must make for it.
Naturally he was after women all the time, because always the women
whom he did not yet know contained the secret of life and bliss. He
could never see a woman in the street talking to another man without
being envious, because that might be the woman. Of course, he never
succeeded, as you can imagine. He succeeded less and less, and he made
a perfect fool of himself. He grew older, and the chances of meeting the
ultimate woman became exceedingly small. So the time came for a new
realization. He got into analysis, but nothing changed until the following
thing happened: he was walking in the street and a young couple came
along talking intimately, and instantly there was pain in his heart—that
was the woman! Then suddenly the pain vanished, and for a moment he
had an absolutely clear vision. He realized: “Well, they will do it, they are
going on, the thing is taken care of, I have not to take care of it any
longer, thank heaven!”
Now, what happened? Simply that he crossed the threshold of the diaphragm, for in maõipÖra one is blind in passion. Of course, when he sees
such a couple he thinks, “I want it, I am identical with that man.” And he
is identical in maõipÖra. He is identical with every buffalo, and naturally
he complains when he cannot jump out of his skin and into the skin of
somebody else. But here he suddenly realizes that he is not that man; he
breaks through the veil of illusion, that mystical identity, and knows that
he is not that fellow. Yet he has an inkling that he is in a peculiar way
identical with him, that man is himself continuing life; he is not cast
aside. For his substance is not only his personal self but the substance of
that young man, too. He himself lives on, and the thing is taken care of.
And he is in it, he is not out of it.
You see, that is a picture of psychical existence over or beyond the
maõipÖra form. It is nothing but a thought—nothing has changed in the
visible world; not one atom is in a different place from before. But one
thing has changed: the psychical substance has entered the game. You
see, a mere thought, or almost an indescribable feeling, a psychical fact,
changes his whole situation, his whole life, and he can step across to
anvhata, to the world where psychical things begin.
Now, going from anvhata to viçuddha is quite analogous, but it goes
very much further. You see, in anvhata thought and feeling are identical
with objects. For a man, feeling is identical with a certain woman, for
instance, and for a woman with that particular man. The thought of a
48

26 OCTOBER 1932
scientist is identical with such-and-such a book. It is such a book. So there
are always external conditions, either for the feeling or for the mind.
Thought is always specific—scientific, philosophic, or aesthetic, for example—because it is always identical with a particular object. And so
feeling is identical with certain people or things. It is because somebody
has done so-and-so that one is angry, because there are such-and-such
conditions. Therefore our emotions, our values, our thoughts, our convictions are interdependent with facts, with what we call objects. They
are not in themselves or through themselves. They are, as I say, interwoven with concrete facts.
You know, it is sometimes an ideal not to have any kind of convictions
or feelings that are not based upon reality. One must even educate people, when they have to cross from maõipÖra to anvhata, that their emotions ought to have a real basis, that they cannot swear hell and damnation at somebody on a mere assumption, and that there are absolute
reasons why they are not justified in doing such a thing. They really have
to learn that their feelings should be based on facts.
But to cross from anvhata to viçuddha one should unlearn all that. One
should even admit that all one’s psychical facts have nothing to do with
material facts. For instance, the anger which you feel for somebody or
something, no matter how justified it is, is not caused by those external
things. It is a phenomenon all by itself. That is what we call taking a thing
on its subjective level. Say somebody has offended you, and you dream of
that person and feel again the same anger in the dream. Then I say,
“That dream tells me just what the anger means, what it is in reality.” But
you contend that the person had said such-and-such a thing, so you are
perfectly justified in feeling such anger and assuming such an attitude
toward him. Well, I must admit all that to be perfectly true, and then I
humbly say, “Now, when you have had your anger and are reasonable
again, let us consider this dream, for there is a subjective stage of interpretation. You consider that man to be your specific bête noire, but he is
really yourself. You project yourself into him, your shadow appears in
him, and that makes you angry. Naturally one is not inclined to admit
such a possibility, but after a while, when the process of analysis is effective, it dawns upon one that it is most probably true. We are perhaps
identical even with our own worst enemy. In other words, our worst
enemy is perhaps within ourselves.
If you have reached that stage, you begin to leave anvhata, because you
have succeeded in dissolving the absolute union of material external
facts with internal or psychical facts. You begin to consider the game of
49

LECTURE 3
the world as your game, the people that appear outside as exponents of
your psychical condition. Whatever befalls you, whatever experience or
adventure you have in the external world, is your own experience.
For instance, an analysis does not depend upon what the analyst is. It
is your own experience. What you experience in analysis is not due to
me; it is what you are. You will have exactly that experience with me
which is your own experience. Not everybody falls in love with me, not
everybody takes offense when I make a caustic remark, and not everybody admires a very drastic expression I use. The experience in analysis,
in which I am always the same Dr. Jung, is a very different procedure with
different people. Individuals are very different, and on account of that,
analysis is always a different experience, even to myself. I am the one who
is equal to myself in all such conditions, but the patients vary, and accordingly the experience of analysis varies to me all the time. But naturally the patient believes that his analysis is so-and-so because I am in it.
He does not see that it is also his subjective experience. As long as the
patient looks at analysis in such a way—that it is merely a personal flirtation or a personal discussion—he has not gained what he ought to have
gained out of it, because he has not seen himself. When he really begins
to see it as his own experience, then he realizes that Dr. Jung, the partner
in the game, is only relative. He is what the patient thinks of him. He is
simply a hook on which you are hanging your garment; he is not so substantial as he seems to be. He is also your subjective experience.
If you can see that, you are on your way to viçuddha, because in
viçuddha the whole game of the world becomes your subjective experience. The world itself becomes a reflection of the psyche. For instance,
when I say that the world consists of psychical images only—that whatever you touch, whatever you experience, is imaged because you cannot
perceive anything else; that if you touch this table, you might think it
substantial, but what you really experience is a peculiar message from
the tactile nerves to your brain; and even this you may not experience
because I can cut off your fingers, you still experience your fingers only
because the cut-off nerves cannot function in any other way; and your
brain even is also only an image up here—when I say such a heretical
thing I am on the way to viçuddha. If I should succeed—and I hope I shall
not—in taking all of you up to viçuddha, you would certainly complain;
you would stifle, you would not be able to breathe any longer, because
there is nothing you could possibly breathe. It is ether. In reaching
viçuddha, you reach the airless space, where there is no earthly chance
for the ordinary individual to breathe. So it seems to be a very critical
kind of adventure.
50

26 OCTOBER 1932
Now, in talking about these centers, we must never omit the actual
symbols; they teach us a great deal. I want to call your attention to the
animal symbolism of which I have not yet spoken. You know that the
series of animals begins in mÖlvdhvra with the elephant that supports the
earth, meaning that tremendous urge which supports human consciousness, the power that forces us to build such a conscious world. To the
Hindu the elephant functions as the symbol of the domesticated libido,
parallel to the image of the horse with us. It means the force of consciousness, the power of will, the ability to do what one wants to do.
In the next center is the makara, the leviathan. So in crossing from
mÖlvdhvra to svvdhiü°hvna, the power that has nourished you hitherto
shows now an entirely different quality: what is the elephant on the surface of the world is the leviathan in the depths. The elephant is the biggest, strongest animal upon the surface of the earth, and the leviathan is
the biggest and most terrible animal down in the waters. But it is one and
the same animal: the power that forces you into consciousness and that
sustains you in your conscious world proves to be the worst enemy when
you come to the next center. For there you are really going out of this
world, and everything that makes you cling to it is your worst enemy. The
greatest blessing in this world is the greatest curse in the unconscious. So
the makara is just the reverse: the water elephant, the whale dragon that
devours you, is the thing that has nourished and supported you hitherto—just as the benevolent mother that brought you up becomes in
later life a devouring mother that swallows you again. If you cannot give
her up she becomes an absolutely negative factor—she supports the life
of your childhood and youth, but to become adult you must leave all
that, and then the mother force is against you. So anyone attempting to
leave this world for another kind of consciousness, the water world or the
unconscious, has the elephant against him; then the elephant becomes
the monster of the underworld.
In maõipÖra the ram is the symbolic animal, and the ram is the sacred
animal of Agni, the god of fire. That is astrological. The ram, Aries, is the
domicilium of Mars, the fiery planet of passions, impulsiveness, rashness,
violence, and so on. Agni is an apt symbol. It is again the elephant, but
in a new form. And it is no longer an insurmountable power—the sacred
power of the elephant. It is now a sacrificial animal, and it is a relatively
small sacrifice—not the great sacrifice of the bull but the smaller sacrifice of the passions. That is, to sacrifice the passions is not so terribly
expensive. The small black animal that is against you is no longer like the
leviathan of the depths in the cakra before; the danger has already diminished. Your own passions are really less a danger than to be drowned
51

LECTURE 3
in unconsciousness; to be unconscious of one’s passion is much worse
than to suffer from passion. And that is expressed by Aries, the ram; it is
a small sacrificial animal of which you don’t need to be afraid, for it is no
longer equipped with the strength of the elephant or the leviathan. You
have overcome the worst danger when you are aware of your fundamental desires or passions.
The next animal is the gazelle, again a transformation of the original
force. The gazelle or antelope is not unlike the ram, living upon the
surface of the earth—the difference being that it is not a domesticated
animal like the male sheep, nor is it a sacrificial animal. It is not at all
offensive; it is exceedingly shy and elusive, on the contrary, and very fleet
of foot—it vanishes in no time. When you come upon a herd of gazelles,
you are always amazed at the way they disappear. They just fly into space
with great leaps. There are antelopes in Africa that take leaps of six to ten
meters—something amazing; it is as if they had wings. And they are also
graceful and tender, and have exceedingly slender legs and feet. They
hardly touch the ground, and the least stirring of the air is sufficient to
make them fly away, like birds. So there is a birdlike quality in the gazelle. It is as light as air; it touches the earth only here and there. It is an
animal of earth, but it is almost liberated from the power of gravity. Such
an animal would be apt to symbolize the force, the efficiency, and the
lightness of psychical substance—thought and feeling. It has already lost
a part of the heaviness of the earth. Also, it denotes that in anvhata the
psychical thing is an elusive factor, hardly to be caught. It has exactly the
quality that we doctors would mean when we say that it is exceedingly
difficult to discover the psychogenic factor in a disease.
Mr. Dell: Would you compare it also to the unicorn?
Dr. Jung: I would say it is a close analogy, and you know the unicorn is
a symbol of the Holy Ghost—that would be a Western equivalent.7
Mrs. Sawyer: The unicorn derives from the rhinoceros, so that would
also be an analogy.
Dr. Jung: Yes, the rhinoceros has survived in the legend of the unicorn.
The unicorn is not a real animal, but the rhinoceros has been a very real
animal in this country. For instance, one half of a rhinoceros has been
found, well preserved, in an oil pit somewhere in Eastern Europe—I
think in Poland. It was of the glacial period, a European rhinoceros. So
the unicorn is most probably a faint echo of those days when man saw the
actual rhinoceros here. Of course, one cannot prove it, but it is at least
7 Jung gave an extended commentary on the symbolic significance of the unicorn in
Psychology and Alchemy, in CW, vol. 12, §§518–54.

52

26 OCTOBER 1932
a very nice analogy to our process here—the transformation of the elephant into this tender, gentle, light-footed gazelle.
Now, that is a very apt symbol of the psychogenic factor. And the discovery of the psychogenic factor in medicine was really something you
could compare with the crossing from maõipÖra to anvhata. I remember
very well the time when professors said: “Well, there is some psychic disturbance too, naturally imagination has something to do with it, and an
upset psychology can produce all sorts of symptoms,” and so on. It was
thought originally that the psyche was some sort of foam or essence, produced by the body, and nothing in itself, and that so-called psychological
causality did not really exist, that it was more symptomatic. Not even
Freud takes the psychogenic factor as substantial. The psyche for him is
something rather physiological, a sort of byplay in the life of the body.
He is convinced that there is a lot of chemistry in it, or ought to be—that
the whole thing goes back to the chemistry of the body, that it is
hormones or God knows what. So the discovery of a real psychogenic
factor (which is not yet realized in medicine, please!) is a great and taletelling event. It would be the recognition of the psyche itself as something that of course functions together with the body, but which has the
dignity of a cause. You see, if a doctor admits such a thing he is going
really a long way. If he puts the psychogenic factor, as causal, among
microbes, colds, unfavorable social conditions, heredity, and so on, with
that he recognizes the psyche as something that does exist and has actual
effect. The logical medical mind does not quite trust whether it is really
something you could lay hands on, for it has that elusive quality of the
gazelle. And you know that when the psyche manifests itself in reality, it
is usually against us. For inasmuch as it is not against us, it is simply identical with our consciousness. Our consciousness is not against us, and we
consider everything to be our own conscious doing, but the psychic factor is always something that we assume to be not our doing. We try to
deny it and to repress it. Say I want to write a letter that is disagreeable to
me. Then immediately I have the psychic factor against me. I am not able
to find that letter—it has been spirited away; I discover that I have mislaid it unconsciously. I wanted to take particular care of that letter, but
because I have resistances against it I put it in the wrong pocket or in a
corner where I shall not find it for months. One is inclined to speak of
an imp that has busied himself with it. One feels something demoniacal
in the way just the things one painfully needs are spirited away. The same
thing occurs in hysteria: just where it would matter, things take a queer
course. Where it is very important that one should say the right thing,
one says just the wrong thing; one’s words are turned in one’s mouth. So
53

LECTURE 3
one cannot help recognizing the fact that some living devil is against
one. Thus the old idea that such people were possessed by devils, were
the victims of witches, and so forth.
Mr. Baumann: There is a very good book by Friedrich Theodor Vischer, Auch Einer (Also one).8
Dr. Jung: Yes, a German book about one of those who know about
things, that is, the imp in objects. For instance, when you lose your spectacles you will always lose them in an unlikely place, perhaps upon a
chair of such a design that the spectacles fit in perfectly. And you can be
absolutely sure that when you drop a piece of buttered toast on the floor
it will always fall on the buttered side. Or when you are putting your
coffeepot upon the table, it will try by all means to put its spout through
the handle of the milk pot, so that you spill the milk when you lift the
pot.
Mr. Dell: Die Tücke des Objekts (the malice of objects).
Dr. Jung: Yes, the devilish cunning of objects, and Vischer made a
whole system of that in Auch Einer. It is exceedingly quixotic naturally,
but he gets the psychic factor all right, because it is in a way our doing,
and yet it is not our doing; it happens in an impish way. The elusiveness
of the psychogenic factor is amazing. In analysis also it is always escaping,
because wherever you try to attack it the patient denies it and says, “But
that is what I wanted to do; that is myself.” He keeps it out of the way all
the time because he himself is afraid to discover it. He is afraid that a
screw is loose somewhere in his head; he thinks it would mean that he
was mad.
So the crossing-over from maõipÖra to anvhata is really very difficult.
The recognition that the psyche is a self-moving thing, something genuine and not yourself, is exceedingly difficult to see and to admit. For it
means that the consciousness which you call yourself is at an end. In your
consciousness everything is as you have put it, but then you discover that
you are not master in your own house, you are not living alone in your
own room, and there are spooks about that play havoc with your realities,
and that is the end of your monarchy. But if you understand it rightly,
and as tantric yoga shows you, this recognition of the psychogenic factor
is merely the first recognition of the puruüa. It is the beginning of the
great recognition appearing in the most grotesque and ridiculous forms.
You see, that is what the gazelle signifies.
Now you remember the elephant appears in viçuddha again. So here
we encounter the full power, the insurmountable sacred strength of the
8 Friedrich Theodor Vischer, Auch Einer, (Stuttgart and Leipzig, 1884).

54

26 OCTOBER 1932
animal as it was in mÖlvdhvra. That is, we meet there all the power which
led us into life, into this conscious reality. But here it is not supporting
mÖlvdhvra, this earth. It is supporting those things which we assume to be
the most airy, the most unreal, and the most volatile, namely, human
thoughts. It is as if the elephant were now making realities out of concepts. We admit that our concepts are nothing but our imagination,
products of our feeling or of our intellect—abstractions or analogies,
sustained by no physical phenomena.
The thing that unites them all, that expresses them all, is the concept
of energy. In philosophy, for instance, take the example of Plato in his
parable of the cave.9 He tries by that rather clumsy parable to explain the
subjectivity of our judgment, which is really the same idea which was
called later on in the history of philosophy the theory of cognition. He
describes people sitting in a cave with their backs against the light, looking at the shadows on the wall, cast by the moving figures outside. Now,
this is an exceedingly apt parable to explain the problem, but it needed
more than two thousand years until that problem was formulated in a
philosophically abstract way in Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason.
We always have the impression that such philosophical or scientific
concepts as energy—call them theories or hypotheses—are perfectly futile things that change tomorrow, like a breath of air that has no existence whatever. Yet these are apparently the things sustained and
pushed by the elephant, as if the elephant were making a reality of such
concepts which are really the mere products of our mind. That is our
prejudice—to think that those products are not also realities.
But here is the hitch in the whole thing, this is not so simple. Your
speculations lead to abstractions, and these abstractions you very clearly
feel to be merely your conclusions. They are artificial; you are never sure
that they do exist in reality. But if perchance you should experience in
reality what you have concluded, then you say, “Now this is real, insofar
as my thought is real.” For example, you say, “Tomorrow we shall have a
thunderstorm.” It is not very likely at this time of the year, but from all
the meteorological data you make that conclusion though you yourself
think it rather improbable. And tomorrow we do actually have a thunderstorm, and then you say, “Is it not marvelous that I came to such a
conclusion? My feeling must be right.” So you substantiate your thinking
in reality, and this reality affects the whole man. It affects you through
and through—you get drenched by the rain, you hear the thunder, and
you may be struck by the lightning—you get the whole thing.
9 Plato, The Republic, book 7, translated by D. Lee (London, 1955), 514ff.

55

LECTURE 3
Now, according to the symbolism of the cakras something similar happens in viçuddha. The power of the elephant is lent to psychic realities,
which our reason would like to consider as mere abstractions. But the
power of the elephant is never lent to products of the mere intellect
because they are never convincing; they always need physical evidence.
And for purely psychical things, there is no possibility of anything like
physical evidence. For instance, you know that it is impossible in physical
fact ever to make a concept of God, because it is not a physical concept.
It has nothing to do with an experience in space and time. It has simply
no connection with space and time, and therefore you cannot expect
any such subsequent effect. But if you have the psychical experience, if the
psychical fact forces itself upon you, then you understand it, and you can
then make a concept of it. The abstraction, or the concept of God, has
come out of experience. It is not your intellectual concept, though it can
be intellectual too. But the main thing in such an experience is that it is
a psychical fact. And psychical facts are the reality in viçuddha. Therefore
the insurmountable force of reality is sustaining no longer the data of
this earth but psychical data.
For example, you know that you would like to do something very
much, but you feel it is simply not to be, as if there were an absolute
interdiction. Or you feel very strongly that you don’t want to do a certain
thing, yet the psychical factor demands it, and you know there is no defense—you must go that way; there is no hesitation about it. That is the
power of the elephant, which you feel perhaps even in what you would
call absurdities. Those are the experiences of the reality of viçuddha as
expressed by the symbolism.
That is only the fifth cakra, and we are already out of breath—literally
so—we are beyond the air we breathe; we are reaching, say, into the remote future of mankind, or of ourselves. For any man has at least the
potential faculty to experience that which will be the collective experience in two thousand years, perhaps in ten thousand years. What we are
dealing with today has already been we don’t know how many millions of
times before in dim ages of the past by primitive medicine men, or by old
Romans or Greeks—it has all been anticipated. And we anticipate thousands of years to come, so we really reach out into a future which we do
not yet possess. Therefore it is rather bold to speak of the sixth cakra,10
which is naturally completely beyond our reach, because we have not
10 Of the vjñv cakra, Hauer stated: “The god, man power, has disappeared at this stage,
but a differentiated woman power is still working, and disappears only in the last cakra. I
am not sure whether you will find psychological parallels for that” (HS, 90).

56

26 OCTOBER 1932
even arrived at viçuddha. But since we have that symbolism we can at least
construct something theoretical about it.
The vjñv center, you remember, looks like a winged seed, and it contains no animal. That means there is no psychical factor, nothing against
us whose power we might feel. The original symbol, the li´ga, is here
repeated in a new form, the white state. Instead of the dark germinating
condition, it is now in the full blazing white light, fully conscious. In
other words, the God that has been dormant in mÖlvdhvra is here fully
awake, the only reality; and therefore this center has been called the condition in which one unites with åiva. One could say it was the center of
the unio mystica with the power of God, meaning that absolute reality
where one is nothing but psychic reality, yet confronted with the psychic
reality that one is not. And that is God. God is the eternal psychical object. God is simply a word for the non-ego. In viçuddha psychical reality
was still opposed to physical reality. Therefore one still used the support
of the white elephant to sustain the reality of the psyche. Psychical facts
still took place within us, although they had a life of their own.
But in the vjñv center the psyche gets wings—here you know you are
nothing but psyche. And yet there is another psyche, a counterpart to
your psychical reality, the non-ego reality, the thing that is not even to be
called self, and you know that you are going to disappear into it. The ego
disappears completely; the psychical is no longer a content in us, but we
become contents of it. You see that this condition in which the white
elephant has disappeared into the self is almost unimaginable. He is no
longer perceptible even in his strength because he is no longer against
you. You are absolutely identical with him. You are not even dreaming of
doing anything other than what the force is demanding, and the force is
not demanding it since you are already doing it—since you are the force.
And the force returns to the origin, God.
To speak about the lotus of the thousand petals above, the sahasrvra
center, is quite superfluous because that is merely a philosophical concept with no substance to us whatever; it is beyond any possible experience. In vjñv there is still the experience of the self that is apparently
different from the object, God. But in sahasrvra one understands that it
is not different, and so the next conclusion would be that there is no
object, no God, nothing but brahman. There is no experience because
it is one, it is without a second. It is dormant, it is not, and therefore it is
nirvvõa. This is an entirely philosophical concept, a mere logical conclusion from the premises before. It is without practical value for us.
Mrs. Sawyer: I would like to ask you if the Eastern idea of going up
57

LECTURE 3
through the cakras means that each time you have reached a new center
you have to return to mÖlvdhvra?
Dr. Jung: As long as you live you are in mÖlvdhvra naturally. It is quite
self-evident that you cannot always live in meditation, or in a trance condition. You have to go about in this world; you have to be conscious and
let the gods sleep.
Mrs. Sawyer: Yes, but you could think of it in two ways: as doing all these
things together, or as making a trip up and down.
Dr. Jung: The cakra symbolism has the same meaning that is expressed
in our metaphors of the night sea-journey, or climbing a sacred mountain, or initiation. It is really a continuous development. It is not leaping
up and down, for what you have arrived at is never lost. Say you have
been in mÖlvdhvra and then you reach the water center, and afterward
you return apparently. But you do not return; it is an illusion that you
return—you have left something of yourself in the unconscious. Nobody
touches the unconscious without leaving something of himself there.
You may forget or repress it, but then you are no longer whole. When
you have learned that two times two makes four, it will be so in all eternity—it will never be five. Only those people return who thought they
touched it but were only full of illusions about it. If you have really experienced it, you cannot lose this experience. It is as if so much of your
substance had remained, so much of your blood and weight. You can
return to the previous condition, forgetting that you have lost a leg, but
your leg has been bitten off by the leviathan. Many people who got into
the water say, “Never shall I go there again!” But they left something,
something has stayed there. And if you get through the water and into
the fire of passion, you never can really turn back, because you cannot
lose the connection with your passion that you have gained in maõipÖra.
Question: Is it like Wotan, who loses one eye?
Dr. Jung: Exactly. And like Osiris, the god of the underworld, who also
loses one eye. Wotan has to sacrifice his one eye to the well of Mimir, the
well of wisdom, which is the unconscious. You see, one eye will remain in
the depths or turned toward it.11 Thus Jakob Boehme, when he was “enchanted into the center of nature,” as he says, wrote his book about the
“reversed eye.” One of his eyes was turned inward; it kept on looking into
the underworld—which amounts to the loss of one eye. He had no
longer two eyes for this world. So when you have actually entered a
higher cakra you never really turn back; you remain there. Part of you
11 For Jung’s analysis of Wotan, in which he does not specifically deal with this motif, see
“Wotan” (1936), in CW, vol. 10.

58

26 OCTOBER 1932
can split off, but the farther you have reached into the series of the
cakras, the more expensive will be the apparent return. Or if you return,
having lost the memory of the connection with that center, then you are
like a wraith. In reality you are just nothing, a mere shadow, and your
experiences remain empty.
Mrs. Crowley: Do you think the idea is to experience those cakras,
which one has gone through, simultaneously?
Dr. Jung: Certainly. As I told you, in our actual historical psychological
development we have about reached anvhata and from there we can
experience mÖlvdhvra, and all the subsequent centers of the past, by
knowledge of records, and tradition, and also through our unconscious.
Suppose somebody reached the vjñv center, the state of complete consciousness, not only self-consciousness. That would be an exceedingly
extended consciousness which includes everything—energy itself—a
consciousness which knows not only “That is Thou” but more than
that—every tree, every stone, every breath of air, every rat’s tail—all that
is yourself; there is nothing that is not yourself. In such an extended consciousness all the cakras would be simultaneously experienced, because
it is the highest state of consciousness, and it would not be the highest if
it did not include all the former experiences.

59

LECTURE 41
2 November 1932

Dr. Jung: We have here a question from Mr. Allemann:
I do not understand why our daily life should be thought of as taking place solely in mÖlvdhvra. Would not mÖlvdhvra apply more to
the life of animals and primitives who live in complete harmony
with nature? Should we not rather consider our cultivated life under
the sthÖla aspect of the higher cakras? The awakening of the Kundalini would then be similar to the conscious understanding of the
sÖküma aspect. That would mean: in order to awaken Kundalini we
must go down to the roots of things, to the “mothers,” and first of all
understand consciously the sÖküma aspect of mÖlvdhvra, the earth.
Mr. Allemann has brought up a very complicated problem. I understand
his difficulties because they represent the difficulties of our Western
standpoint when it is confronted with Eastern ideas. We are confronted
with a paradox: for us consciousness is located high up, in the vjñv cakra,
so to speak, and yet mÖlvdhvra, our reality, lies in the lowest cakra. Besides this, another apparent contradiction strikes us: mÖlvdhvra is, as we
have seen, our world. How can it then be located in the pelvis as it is in
the cakra system?
I will try once again to give a general explanation of how we are to
understand this, but for the moment we must keep quite separate the
symbolism of the cakras and the philosophy of the sthÖla-sÖküma aspect of
things. The three aspects covered by the terms sthÖla, sÖküma, and parv
are a philosophical way of looking at things. From the standpoint of theory, each cakra can be regarded from all three aspects. The cakras however, are symbols. They bring together in image form complex and manifold ideas of ideas and facts.
The word symbol comes from the Greek word symballein, to throw together. It has to do, then, with things gathered together, or with a heap of
1 [Note to the 1932 edition: This lecture was arranged by Miss Wolff for the report of the
German seminar, with additional material from Dr. Jung. It is translated by Mrs. Baynes.]

60

2 NOVEMBER 1932
material thrown together, which we, as the expression shows, take as a
whole. We could translate the word symbol as “something viewed as a totality,” or as “the vision of things brought into a whole.” We must always have
recourse to a symbol when we are dealing with a great variety of aspects or
with a multiplicity of things which form a connected unit and which are so
closely woven together in all their separate parts that we cannot separate
or take away any parts without destroying the connections and losing the
meaning of the totality. Modern philosophy has formulated this way of
looking at things under what is known as Gestalt theory.2 A symbol, then,
is a living Gestalt, or form—the sum total of a highly complex set of facts
which our intellect cannot master conceptually, and which therefore cannot be expressed in any way other than by the use of an image.
Take, for example, the problem of knowledge, which has presented
difficulties so great and so manifold as to occupy thinkers from the time
when philosophy first developed down to the present moment. Plato, for
instance, never got as far as formulating an adequate theory of the problem of knowledge; he could not go beyond the image of the cave, and
had to describe the problem in terms of a vision or concrete image. Two
thousand years had to pass before Kant could formulate a theory of
knowledge.
So, too, the cakras are symbols. They symbolize highly complex psychic facts which at the present moment we could not possibly express
except in images. The cakras are therefore of great value to us because
they represent a real effort to give a symbolic theory of the psyche. The
psyche is something so highly complicated, so vast in extent, and so rich
in elements unknown to us, and its aspects overlap and interweave with
one another in such an amazing degree, that we always turn to symbols
in order to try to represent what we know about it. Any theory about it
would be premature because it would become entangled in particularities and would lose sight of the totality we set out to envisage.
You have seen from my attempt at an analysis of the cakras how difficult it is to reach their content, and with what complex conditions we
have to deal when we are studying not just consciousness but the totality
of the psyche. The cakras, then, become a valuable guide for us in this
obscure field because the East, and India especially, has always tried to
understand the psyche as a whole. It has an intuition of the self, and
therefore it sees the ego and consciousness as only more or less unessential parts of the self. All this seems very strange to us: it appears to us as
though India were fascinated by the background of consciousness, because we ourselves are entirely identified with our foreground, with the
2 See Kurt Koffka, Principles of Gestalt Psychology (New York, 1935).

61

LECTURE 4
conscious. But now, among us, too, the background, or hinterland, of
the psyche has come to life, and since it is so obscure and so difficult to
access, we are at first forced to represent it symbolically. Thus, for example, there comes to our notice the paradoxical situation in which mÖlvdhvra is localized in the pelvis and at the same time represents our world,
and this paradox can be expressed only by a symbol. It is the same with
the apparent contradiction contained in the fact that we think of consciousness as located in our heads, and nonetheless we live in the lowest
cakra, in mÖlvdhvra.
As we have seen in the first English seminar of this autumn, mÖlvdhvra
is the symbol of our present psychic situation, because we live entangled
in earthly causalities.3 It represents the entanglement and dependence
of our conscious life as it actually is. mÖlvdhvra is not just the outer world
as we live in it; it is our total consciousness of all outer and inner personal
experiences. In our conscious life of everyday we are like highly developed animals, tied down by our environment and entangled and conditioned by it. But our Western consciousness does not look at it this way
at all. In our world, on the contrary, we are living in the upper centers.
Our consciousness is localized in the head; we feel it to be there; we
think and will in our heads. We are the lords of nature, and we have
command over the environmental conditions and the blind laws that
bind primitive man hand and foot. In our consciousness we sit enthroned on high and look down upon nature and animals. To us archaic
man is Neanderthal man, little better than an animal. We do not see in
the very least that God appears as an animal also. To us animal means
“bestial.” What should really seem above us seems to be below us and is
taken as something regressive and degraded. Therefore we “go down
into” svvdhiü°hvna or “fall into” the emotionality of maõipÖra. Because we
are identified with the consciousness we talk about the subconscious.
When we go into the unconscious we descend to a lower level. Therefore
we can say that humanity in general has reached the level of the anvhata
cakra insofar as it feels itself bound by the suprapersonal values of
anvhata. All culture creates suprapersonal values. A thinker whose ideas
show an activity that is independent of the events of daily life could say
that he is in the viçuddha, or almost in the vjñv center.
But all that is only the sthÖla aspect of the problem. The sthÖla aspect
is the personal aspect. To us personally, it seems as if we were in the
higher centers. We think that because our consciousness and the collective suprapersonal culture in which we live are in the anvhata center, we
3 The seminar on visions had resumed earlier the same day. For Jung’s comments on
mulvdhvra, see The Visions Seminar vol. 7, 10.

62

2 NOVEMBER 1932
are there in all respects. Being identified with the conscious, we do not
see that there exists something outside it and that this something is not
above but below.
But by means of psychology or tantric philosophy we can achieve a
standpoint from which we can observe that suprapersonal events do take
place within our own psyche. To look at things from a suprapersonal
standpoint is to arrive at the sÖküma aspect. We can attain this standpoint
because inasmuch as we create culture, we create suprapersonal values,
and when we do this, we begin to see the sÖküma aspect. Through culture
we get an intuition of the other than personal psychological possibilities
because the suprapersonal appears in it. The cakra system manifests itself in culture, and culture can therefore be divided into various levels
such as that of the belly, heart, and head centers. Therefore we can experience and demonstrate the various centers as they appear in the life of
the individual, or in the evolution of humanity. We begin in the head; we
identify with our eyes and our consciousness: quite detached and objective, we survey the world. That is vjñv. But we cannot linger forever in the
pure spheres of detached observation, we must bring our thoughts into
reality. We voice them and so trust them to the air. When we clothe our
knowledge in words, we are in the region of viçuddha, or the throat center. But as soon as we say something that is especially difficult, or that
causes us positive or negative feelings, we have a throbbing of the heart,
and then the anvhata center begins to be activated. And still another step
further, when for example a dispute with someone starts up, when we
have become irritable and angry and get beside ourselves, then we are in
maõipÖra.
If we go lower still, the situation becomes impossible, because then the
body begins to speak. For this reason, in England, everything below the
diaphragm is taboo. Germans always go a little below it and hence easily
become emotional. Russians live altogether below the diaphragm—they
consist of emotions. French and Italians behave as if they were below it but
they know perfectly well, and so does everyone else, that they are not.
It is a rather delicate and painful matter to speak of what happens in
svvdhiü°hvna. When for example, an emotion reaches a point of great
intensity, it no longer expresses itself in words, but in a physiological way.
It does not leave the body by way of the mouth, but in other ways—as, for
instance, the bladder. Svvdhiü°hvna represents the level where psychic
life may be said to begin. Only when this level became activated did mankind awaken from the sleep of mÖlvdhvra and learn the first rules of bodily decency. The beginning of moral education consisted in attending to
our needs in the places suitable for them, just as still happens in the
education of a small child. Dogs too have learned this; they are already
63

LECTURE 4
living in svvdhiü°hvna inasmuch as they deposit their visiting cards at
trees and corners. The dogs that come after read the messages and know
from them how the land lies, whether the preceding dog was fed or
empty, whether it was a large or a small dog—an important difference in
the breeding season. Thus dogs can give all sorts of news about one another and can direct themselves accordingly.
This first and lowest means of expressing psychic life is also still used by
human beings, for instance by very primitive criminals. You know what is
meant by grumus merdae (mound of excrement). The thief deposits his
excrement in the place he has looted and says in this way: “This is my
signature; this belongs to me; woe to him who crosses my path.” Thus it
becomes a sort of apotropaic charm—a relic of archaic times. For in primitive conditions this sign language actually has a great, even a vital, importance. A person can tell by it whether dangerous or useful animals have
made a given track and whether the track is fresh or not. Naturally the
same thing is true of human tracks; if hostile tribes are in the neighborhood, fresh human excrement is a sign of alarm. The more primitive the
conditions of life, the more valuable the psychic manifestations of this
level. We could say it is the first speech of nature. Psychic manifestations
belonging to svvdhiü°hvna are therefore often present in our dreams, and
certain witticisms and the broad jokes of the Middle Ages are full of them.
As to mÖlvdhvra, we know nothing about it because at this level psychic
life is dormant. Mr. Allemann is therefore quite correct in saying that
mÖlvdhvra is the life of animals and primitives who live in complete harmony with nature. Our cultivated life, on the other hand, is to be looked
at as the sthÖla aspect of the higher cakras. The awakening of Kundalini
would then be similar to the conscious understanding of the sÖküma aspect. That is quite true. But what must we do in order to understand
consciously the sÖküma aspect of mÖlvdhvra, or of the earth?
Here we meet again the great paradox. In consciousness we are in
vjñv, and yet we actually live in mÖlvdhvra. That is the sthÖla aspect. But
can we win another aspect? As we know, we cannot understand a thing if
we are still immersed in it and identified with it. Only when we reach a
standpoint that is “outside” the experience in question, can we wholly
understand what we were experiencing before. Thus, for example, we
can form an objective judgment of the nation, race, or continent to
which we belong only when we have lived for a time in a foreign country
and so are able to look at our own country from without.
How, then, can we put aside our personal standpoint, which represents the sthÖla aspect, and take another, a suprapersonal one which will
show us where we actually are in this world? How can we find out that we
are in mÖlvdhvra? MÖlvdhvra is a condition of psychic sleep, we have said;
64

2 NOVEMBER 1932
we have then no consciousness there and can say nothing about it. I
began by saying that by means of culture we create suprapersonal values
and that by this means we can get an inkling of other psychological possibilities and can reach another state of mind. In the creation of suprapersonal values we begin with the sÖküma aspect. We see things from the
sÖküma aspect when we create symbols. We can also see our psyche under
the sÖküma aspect, and this is just what the symbols of the cakras are. Nor
can I describe this standpoint to you in any way except by means of a
symbol. It is as if we viewed our psychology and the psychology of mankind from the standpoint of a fourth dimension, unlimited by space or
time. The cakra system is created from this standpoint. It is a standpoint
that transcends time and the individual.
The spiritual point of view of India in general is a standpoint of this
sort. Hindus do not begin as we do to explain the world by taking the
hydrogen atom as the starting point, nor do they describe the evolution
of mankind or of the individual from lower to higher, from deep unconsciousness to the highest consciousness. They do not see humanity under
the sthÖla aspect. They speak only of the sÖküma aspect and therefore say:
“In the beginning was the one brahman without a second. It is the one
indubitable reality, being and not-being.”4 They begin in sahasrvra; they
speak the language of the gods and think of man from above down, taking him from the sÖküma or parv aspect. Inner experience is to them revelation; they would never say about this experience “I thought it.”
Naturally we see the East quite differently. In comparison with our
conscious anvhata culture, we can truthfully say that the collective culture of India is in mÖlvdhvra. For proof of this we need only think of the
actual conditions of life in India, its poverty, its dirt, its lack of hygiene,
its ignorance of scientific and technical achievements. Looked at from
the sthÖla aspect the collective culture of India really is in mÖlvdhvra,
whereas ours has reached anvhata. But the Indian concept of life understands humanity under the sÖküma aspect, and looked at from that standpoint everything becomes completely reversed. Our personal consciousness can indeed be located in anvhata or even in vjñv, but nonetheless
our psychic situation as a whole is undoubtedly in mÖlvdhvra.
Suppose we begin to explain the world in terms of sahasrvra and
started off a lecture, for instance, with the words of the Vedanta: “This
world in the beginning was brahman solely; since brahman was alone it
was not unfolded. It knew itself only, and it realized: I am brahman. In
this way it became the universe.” We would rightly be taken for mad, or
4 Jung provided an extended commentary on brahman in Psychological Types, in CW, vol.
6, §§326–47.

65

LECTURE 4
at least it would be thought that we were holding a revival meeting. So if
we are wise and live in reality, when we want to describe something we
always begin with everyday banal events, and with the practical and concrete. In a word, we begin with the sthÖla aspect. To us the things that are
real beyond question are our professions, the places where we live, our
bank accounts, our families and our social connections. We are forced to
take these realities as our premises if we want to live at all. Without personal life, without the here and now, we cannot attain to the suprapersonal. Personal life must first be fulfilled in order that the process of the
suprapersonal side of the psyche can be introduced.
What is suprapersonal in us is shown us again and again in the visions
of our seminar: it is an event outside of the ego and of consciousness. In
the fantasies of our patient we are always dealing with symbols and experiences which have nothing to do with her as Mrs. So-and-So but which
arise from the collective human soul in her and which are therefore collective contents. In analysis the suprapersonal process can begin only
when all the personal life has been assimilated to consciousness. In this
way psychology opens up a standpoint and types of experience that lie
beyond ego consciousness. (The same thing happens in tantric philosophy, but with this difference: there the ego plays no role at all.) This
standpoint and this experience answer the question as to how we can free
ourselves from the overwhelming realities of the world, that is, how to
disentangle our consciousness from the world. You remember, for example, the symbol of water and fire, a picture in which the patient stood in
flames.5 That represents the diving down into the unconscious, into the
baptismal font of svvdhiü°hvna, and the suffering of the fire of maõipÖra.
We now understand that the diving into the water and the enduring of
the flames is not a descent, not a fall into the lower levels, but an ascent.
It is a development beyond the conscious ego, an experience of the personal way into the suprapersonal—a widening of the psychic horizons of
the individual so as to include what is common to all mankind. When we
assimilate the collective unconscious we are not dissolving but creating it.
Only after having reached this standpoint—only after having touched
the baptismal waters of svvdhiü°hvna—can we realize that our conscious
culture, despite all its heights, is still in mÖlvdhvra. We may have reached
vjñv in our personal consciousness, our race in general can still be in
anvhata, but that is all on the personal side still—it is still the sthÖla aspect, because it is valid only for our consciousness. And as long as the ego
is identified with consciousness, it is caught up in this world, the world of
5 [Note to the 1932 edition: English seminar print no. 27.] Jung had commented on this
image earlier that day (The Visions Seminar vol. 7, 11).

66

2 NOVEMBER 1932
the mÖlvdhvra cakra. But we see that it is so only when we have an experience and achieve a standpoint that transcends consciousness. Only when
we have become acquainted with the wide extent of the psyche, and no
longer remain inside the confines of the conscious alone, can we know
that our consciousness is entangled in mÖlvdhvra.
The symbols of the cakra, then, afford us a standpoint that extends
beyond the conscious. They are intuitions about the psyche as a whole,
about its various conditions and possibilities. They symbolize the psyche
from a cosmic standpoint. It is as if a superconsciousness, an all-embracing divine consciousness, surveyed the psyche from above. Looked at
from the angle of this four-dimensional consciousness, we can recognize
the fact that we are still living in mÖlvdhvra. That is the sÖküma aspect.
Observed from that angle we ascend when we go into the unconscious,
because it frees us from everyday consciousness. In the state of ordinary
consciousness, we are actually down below, entangled, rooted in the
earth under a spell of illusions, dependent—in short, only a little more
free than the higher animals. We have culture, it is true, but our culture
is not suprapersonal; it is culture in mÖlvdhvra. We can indeed develop
our consciousness until it reaches the vjñv center, but our vjñv is a personal vjñv, and therefore it is in mÖlvdhvra. Nonetheless, we do not know
that we are in mÖlvdhvra, any more than the American Indians know that
they are living in America. Our vjñv is caught in this world. It is a spark
of light, imprisioned in the world, and when we think, we are merely
thinking in terms of this world.
But the Hindu thinks in terms of the great light. His thinking starts not
from a personal but from a cosmic vjñv. His thinking begins with the
brahman, and ours with the ego. Our thought starts out with the individual and goes out into the general. The Hindu begins with the general
and works down to the individual. From the sÖküma aspect everything is
reversed. From this aspect we realize that everywhere we are still enclosed within the world of causality, that in terms of the cakra we are not
“high up” but absolutely “down below.” We are sitting in a hole, in the
pelvis of the world, and our anvhata center is anvhata in mÖlvdhvra. Our
culture represents the conscious held prisoner in mÖlvdhvra. Looked at
from the sÖküma aspect, everything is still in mÖlvdhvra.
Christianity also is based on the sÖküma aspect. To it, too, the world is
only a preparation for a higher condition, and the here and now, the
state of being involved in this world, is error and sin. The sacraments and
rites of the early church all meant freeing man from the merely personal
state of mind and allowing him to participate symbolically in a higher
condition. In the mystery of baptism—the plunge into svvdhiü°hvna—the
“old Adam” dies and the “spiritual man” is born. The transfiguration and
67

LECTURE 4
ascension of Christ is the symbolical representation and anticipation of
the desired end, that is, being lifted above the personal and into the
suprapersonal. In the old church Christ represents the leader, and
hence the promise of what the mystic or initiate could also contain.
But to non-Christians of the West, the here and now is the only reality.
The sthÖla aspect, the rootedness in mÖlvdhvra, must first be fully lived in
order for us to be able to grow beyond it afterward. Before we get that
far, we are not to know that we are caught in mÖlvdhvra. Only in this way
can we develop our personal consciousness to the level of the vjñv center, and only in this way can we create culture. It is indeed only a personal culture, as I have said, but behind the culture stands God, the suprapersonal. And so we attain to the sÖküma aspect. Only then do we see
that what seemed to us the summit of our endeavor is merely something
personal, merely the light-spark of consciousness. Then we realize that
taken from the standpoint of the psyche as a whole, it is only our personal consciousness that has attained vjñv, but that we, from the aspect
of the cosmic cakra system, are still in mÖlvdhvra.
It is best to understand this by a metaphor. You can imagine the cosmic cakra system as an immense skyscraper whose foundations go deep
down in the earth and contain six cellars, one above the other. One
could then go from the first up to the sixth cellar, but one would still find
oneself in the depths of the earth. This whole cellar system is the cosmic
mÖlvdhvra, and we still find ourselves in it even after we have reached the
sixth cellar—our personal vjñv. This we have to keep in mind always,
otherwise we fall into the mistake made by theosophy and confuse the
personal with the cosmic, the individual light-spark with the divine light.
If we do this we get nowhere; we merely undergo a tremendous inflation.
Taken from the standpoint of the cosmic cakra system, then, we can
see that we are still very low down, that our culture is a culture in
mÖlvdhvra, only a personal culture where the gods have not yet awakened from sleep. Therefore we have to awaken Kundalini in order to
make clear to the individual spark of consciousness the light of the gods.
In the thought world and in psychic events we can reach this other state
of mind, we can look at ourselves from the sÖküma aspect, but then everything is reversed. Then we see that we are sitting in a hole and that we do
not go down into the unconscious, but that in gaining a relation to the
unconscious we undergo a development upward. To activate the unconscious means to awaken the divine, the devz, Kundalini—to begin the
development of the suprapersonal within the individual in order to kindle the light of the gods. Kundalini, which is to be awakened in the sleeping mÖlvdhvra world, is the suprapersonal, the non-ego, the totality of
the psyche through which alone we can attain the higher cakras in a
68

2 NOVEMBER 1932
cosmic or metaphysical sense. For this reason Kundalini is the same principle as the Soter, the Saviour Serpent of the Gnostics. This way of looking
at the world is the sÖküma aspect. The sÖküma aspect is the inner cosmic
meaning of events—the “subtle body,” the suprapersonal.
The parv aspect, which Professor Hauer called the metaphysical, is for
us a purely theoretical abstraction. The Western mind can do nothing
with it. To the Indian way of thinking such hypostatized abstractions are
much more concrete and substantial. For example, to the Indian, the
brahman or the puruüa is the one unquestioned reality; to us it is the final
result of extremely bold speculation.
Mrs. Baynes: What does Professor Hauer mean by the metaphysical
aspect?6
Dr. Jung: That again is the sÖküma aspect. We can speak of it only in
symbols. Such symbols, for instance, are water and fire, the metabasis
into the unconscious.
Mrs. Crowley: Is there a connection between the saôskvra and the creative principle? And is the puer aeternus related to them?7
Dr. Jung: The saôskvra can be compared to mÖlvdhvra, for they are the
unconscious conditions in which we live. The saôskvra are inherited
germs, we might say—unconscious determinants, preexisting qualities
of things to be, life in the roots. But the puer aeternus is the sprout that
buds from the roots, the attempt at synthesis and at a release from
mÖlvdhvra. Only by synthesizing the preexisting conditions can we be
freed from them.
Dr. Reichstein: Are the saôskvra archetypes?
Dr. Jung: Yes, the first form of our existence is a life in archetypes.
Children live in this form before they can say “I.” This world of the collective unconscious is so wonderful that children are continually being
drawn back into it and can separate themselves from it only with difficulty. There are children who never lose the memory of this psychic
background, so extraordinary are the wonders it holds. These memories
continue to live in symbols. The Hindus call them the “jewel world” or
“manidvipa,” the jewel island in the sea of nectar. With a sudden shock
the child passes from this marvelous world of the collective unconscious
into the sthÖla aspect of life or, expressed in another way, a child goes
into svvdhiü°hvna as soon as it notices its body, feels uncomfortable, and
6 Hauer defined his concept of the metaphysical as follows: “I make a distinction between
the theology of tantric yoga . . . meaning their way of looking at the gods, the way they figure
them, etc., and metaphysics, which is the philosophical aspect of that theology” (HS, 25–
26). Under this he included the distinctions between the sthÖla, sÖküma, and parv aspects.
7 On the puer aeternus, see Marie-Louise von Franz, Puer Aeternus (Santa Monica, 1981);
and Puer Papers, edited by James Hillman (Dallas, 1979).

69

LECTURE 4
cries. It becomes conscious of its own life, of its own ego, and has then
left mÖlvdhvra. Its own life now begins: its consciousness begins to separate itself from the totality of the psyche, and the world of the primordial
images, the miraculous world of splendor, lies behind it forever.
Mrs. Crowley: Is there any connection between citta8 and Kundalini?
Dr. Jung: Citta is the conscious and unconscious psychic field, collective mentality, the sphere in which the phenomenon of Kundalini takes
place. Citta is simply our organ of knowledge, the empirical ego into
whose sphere Kundalini breaks.9 Kundalini in essence is quite different
from citta. Therefore her sudden appearance is the coming-up of an element absolutely strange to citta. If she were not entirely different from
citta she could not be perceived.
But we ought not to speculate too much about these concepts, because they belong to a field of thought which is specifically Eastern.
Therefore we have to be very sparing in our use of these concepts. In
general our psychological terms are quite adequate for our use. It is better for us to make use of the tantric concepts only as technical terms,
when our own terminology falls short. Thus, for instance, we are obliged
to borrow the concepts mÖlvdhvra, or sthÖla and sÖküma aspects, from
tantric yoga, because our own language has no expressions for the corresponding psychic facts. But a concept like citta we do not need. Also, the
concept of Kundalini has for us only one use, that is, to describe our own
experiences with the unconscious, the experiences that have to do with
the initiation of the suprapersonal processes. As we know from experience, the serpent symbol then occurs very often.
8 Woodroffe stated: “Citta in its special sense is that faculty (Vùtti) by which the Mind first
recalls to memory (Smaraõa) that of which there has been previously Anubhava or pratyaüka Jñvna—that is, immediate cognition.” In Arthur Avalon (pseud. Sir John Woodroffe), The Serpent Power (London, 1919), 64. For Hauer, “Citta is absolutely everything that
is in our inner world. . . . Everything is under the power of citta and therefore citta is ‘soul’
is the sense of being the complete inner cosmos. . . . If I understand the psychology of
Dr. Jung deeply enough, I feel that his conception of soul has something of this conception
of citta” (HS, 33). Zimmer defined citta as “whatever is experienced or enacted through the
mind.” In Heinrich Zimmer, Philosophies of India, edited by Joseph Campbell (London,
Bollingen Series XXVI, 1953), 321. Surendranath Dasgupta stated, “The states or vùttis of
citta are described as of five kinds: (1) right cognition, (2) illusory knowledge, (3) imagination, (4) sleep, and (5) memory.” In Dasgupta, Yoga Philosophy in Relation to Other Systems of
Indian Thought (Calcutta, 1930), 273. Feuerstein stated, “The word citta is the perfect passive participle of the verbal root =cit, meaning ‘to recognize, observe, perceive’ and also ‘to
be bright, to shine.’ It is applied wherever psychomental phenomena connected with conscious activity are expressed.” The Philosophy of Classical Yoga (Manchester, 1980), 58. For a
commentary on the difficulties of translating this term, see Feuerstein, The Philosophy of
Classical Yoga; and Agehananda Bharati, The Tantric Tradition (London, 1992), 44–47.
9 In his commentary on Pantajali’s Yoga Sutra, Jung translated citta as consciousness. Modern Psychology 3, 122.

70

APPENDIX 1
I N D I A N PA R A L L E L S 1
11 October 1930

On this last seminar day a concept will be given of what the seen means,
of how it is to be understood. This series of pictures has not been shown
as a model. We must not bypass the European world and our own preconditions in order to create a therapeutic method out of such a process.
The revival of inner images must develop organically.
Here one could field the objection whether this case would also have
developed in this way if Dr. Jung, who himself knew about these things,
had not been present. In other words: whether some kind of thought
transmission or influence of the most subtle kind did not take place. To
this one may only respond that, as is known, one cannot experiment with
fate. It is impossible to determine how an event would have played itself
out had this or that moment been different. In the case of spiritual development it is possible to exclude the subjective factor only through finding out whether things have taken place in the same way at other times
and at different places. Dr. Jung tried to seek out such parallels. They
can be demonstrated in the literature of all periods. Besides, Dr. Jung
has in his possession various series of corresponding imaginal developments that originate from human beings of other parts of the world. This
would constitute proof. But there is still another much more striking
proof: a great culture has held these matters and symbols as its religious
and philosophical teachings for more than two thousand years—namely
India. Here we find the historical parallels to the series of images which
1 For the source of this lecture, see the preface, p. xi. Jung’s manuscripts headed “Tantrism” and “Chakras” closely correspond to the report of this seminar. The first page of the
first manuscript consists of a list of Woodroffe’s publications, and references and citations
from Zimmer’s Artistic Form and Yoga in the Sacred Images of India, translated by G. Chapple
and J. Lawson (Princeton, 1984), 26–62. This suggests that these works formed Jung’s
main source for his general conception of tantric yoga. 2 and 3 closely correspond to the
opening sections of this seminar. In a few places the terminology in this seminar has been
made consistent with that used in the preceding seminars.

71

APPENDIX 1
arose spontaneously in the circle of Jungian patients. Thereby proof is
also given that these inner processes are not influenced by Dr. Jung’s
point of view but rather correspond to a primordial structure of the
psyche.
The parallels are above all found in Indian tantrism (tantra means
book). Tantrism is a movement which sprang up at a time when medieval Buddhism was deeply mixed with Hindu elements; that is to say,
when Hinayana-Buddhism (the small vehicle) foundered in India and
developed into Mahayana-Buddhism (the great vehicle) in Mongolia.
That period of Buddhism when the Mahayana branch split off is one of
peculiar syncretism: Hinduism redressed Buddhism through the practice of meditation in such a way that several intermediary forms were
hardly recognizable as Buddhism any longer. The religious form of
Shivaism contained mainly tantric ideas. The middle-Buddhist yoga
practice divides into two trends: svdhana and vajrayvna.
In the magic rituals of svdhana practice mantras (power words) play a
role. By way of the mantra it is possible to call forth the god. The emergence of the vision of the god is supported by a yantra2 (mandala). A
yantra is a cult image, in the center of which the god is depicted.
Through intensive contemplation of the god, it comes alive. The viewer
enters into the god, and the god is in the viewer (identification with the
god, deification of the viewer). This method may be used to attain unity
with the All, but also for sheer magic with worldly aims (fakir trickery).
Contrary to this is the vajrayvna branch. Yvna means vehicle, or way.
Vajra is ambivalent and has both a divine and a phallic meaning. It can
signify: lightening, power, libido, divine energy, intelligence, power of
consciousness. Or else it is the thunderbolt and stands mystically for the
li´ga. Its female counterpart is padma-lotus, which stands mystically for
the yoni. In worship one frequently finds symbols of the unification of
vajra and lotus.
As a consequence of the ambivalent meaning of vajra, a school of the
right hand and a school of the left hand have developed. The former sees in
vajra the divine energy. It represents the philosophical direction and
loses its way from time to time in excessive spirituality. The school of the
left hand, which is rather frowned upon, is the advocate of the sexual
point of view. For it, vajra is the expression of the fulfillment of personal
sexuality. (In the battle between these two viewpoints, one easily recognizes the parallels with the science of psychology today.)
2 Concerning the yantra, Zimmer noted: “This word is a very broad designation for an
instrument or tool, a device or a mechanism a person uses for carrying out a specific task.
The sacred image is a device of very efficient construction used for both magical and ritualistic spiritual functions” (Artistic Form and Yoga in the Sacred Images of India, 28).

72

INDIAN PARALLELS
Mahayana teaches that all things are embryos of the Buddha; they are
embryos of the tathvgata, the complete. All things are formed out of the
same energy; vajra is immanent in everything. Thus also the fourth body
(subtle body) of the Buddha is a manifestation of the lightening power
in the form of bliss; it is vajrasattva or vnanda—bliss. (Nietzsche: “Since
all pleasure wants eternity, wants deep, deep eternity.”3) In this state of
bliss and in the form of vajra the tathvgata embraces its åakti. This is the
eternal cohabitation of the god with its female form, its offspring, its emanation, its matter. This belief occurs above all in Shivaism.4 The worshiped god is åiva, the many-armed. He is the hunter on the mountains,
the lightening, the hidden power of creation. He is purely contemplative. His spouse is åakti, the emanation of power, the active creative
power. This idea corresponds to an old Upanishad concept of puruüa
and prakùiti. (åiva and åakti = puruüa; and prakùiti = li´ga and yoni.) åiva
is also conceived and portrayed in images of worship as çiva-bindu (bindu
= point), that is, as the latent point-shaped power of creation. Surrounding çiva-bindu, around the center, rests the åakti in the shape of a wheel
or cakra. This is the primal form of the mandala. Such a cakra is also
called a padma-lotus. To this relate the mystical syllables Om mani padme
hum, which are best translated as something like: “Oh, by the gem in the
lotus.” They mean the highest perfection and the first beginning at the
same time. Contained therein is everything that can be said. For us such
speculations are the ultimate point at which one may arrive, whereas for
the Indian they are simply the starting point, or point of departure. He
begins with the internal, whereas we constantly live in the external. The
visible world is for him Mvyv, appearance, illusion, Mvyv-çakti, that is, the
product of åakti.5 Consciousness is Mvyv, a veil which consists of the projection of earlier experience (saôskvras). The tabula rasa of childlike
consciousness is predetermined through the experience of foresight—
through the collective unconscious, we would say. But the Indian says:
åakti has consciousness in itself. (Herein lies a key to the inconceivable.)
The first childhood dreams contain the saôskvras, the archetypes. It is
thus in no way surprising that we find obvious cakras or mandalas in chil3 Richard Hollingdale renders this sentence as “Joy wants the eternity of all things,
wants deep, deep, deep eternity!” Friedrich Nietzsche, Thus Spake Zarathustra (London, 1985),
332.
4 [Note to the 1932 edition: In 1910 there were approximately three million followers,
particularly in South India.]
5 [Note to the 1932 edition: Excentric spirituality as well as raw sexuality are to the insightful Mvyv, appearance. Buddha therefore begins one of his sermons by speaking of the
two ways that exist: that of worldliness and that of ascetism. But both are false: the middle
way is true, the eightfold way of right thinking and right action. But what is “right” in each
case he does not say, for that can emerge only from the respective situation.]

73

APPENDIX 1
dren’s drawings.6 Small children are very old; later on we soon grow
younger. In our middle age we are youngest, precisely at the time when
we have completely or almost completely lost contact with the collective
unconscious, the saôskvras. We grow older again only as with the mounting years we remember the saôskvras anew.
Within the vajrayvna branch a peculiar form of yoga practice has developed, the åakti or Kundalini yoga. (Kundala = coiled up; åak = having
power, being able). åakti-Kundalini or Devz-Kundalini is a goddess. She
is the female principle, the self-manifesting power which surrounds the
gem at the center. She is the çabdabrahman, the word of creation. Like a
snake she coils around the center, the gold seed, the jewel, the pearl, the
egg.7 The Kundalini serpent is, however, also a Devz-Kundalini, a chain
of glittering lights, the “world bewilderer.”8 By creating confusion she
produces the world of consciousness, the veil of Mvyv. It is the anima, the
Devz-çakti, which has conceived the world.9 (This is, of course, a view
which corresponds to male psychology. Seen from the woman’s point of
view the animus devises the world.)
åiva emanates åakti. åakti begets Mvyv. Mvyv is desire and thereby
error: she is the fire of error. The desiring consciousness confronts the
purely contemplative consciousness. The visual portrayal of this emanation can take place horizontally as well as vertically. In the first case the
earlier-mentioned mandalas appear. Mvyv is there depicted as a glowing
circle of fire (honeycomb blaze). In the second case one finds portrayals
in which are indicated the darkness and confusion below and the pure
power and light above.10 This vertical arrangement of levels of consciousness in the image of worship corresponds to the teaching of the
different cakras in the human body.11 In the oldest Upanishads the heart
(four ventricles!) is the seat of the soul or of knowledge, of waking con6 [Note to the 1932 edition: Cf. the projection of a child’s drawing from the Rothe circle,
about which Frau Sigg gave a lecture.]
7 [Note to the 1932 edition: Cf. the Orphic mysteries: the world serpent surrounds the
egg.]
8 [In English in the original.] In his copy of Arthur Avalon’s (pseud. Sir John Woodroffe)
The Serpent Power (London, 1919), Jung had marked the phrase “the Devz Kuõìalz . . . the
world bewilderer” (37).
9 In his copy of The Serpent Power, Jung had marked the following passage: “Kuõìalz åakti
is Cit, or consciousness, in its creative aspect as Power. As åakti it is through Her activity that
the world and all human beings therein exist” (254).
10 [Note to the 1932 edition: In Egypt (one finds the representation of) a coiled-up serpent below, with Isis above with a crown of light.]
11 [Note to the 1932 edition: a) According to the Persian sufis, three cakras are distinguished: 1) the mother of the brain, or the spherical heart; 2) the cedar heart; and 3) the
lily heart. b) Cf. the Mexican book of fables, Popol Vuh.]

74

INDIAN PARALLELS
sciousness. It is the root of all limbs and the seat of prvõa, the breath of
life. Prvõa is vvju. Vvju comes from mÖlvdhvra, the root support. The
Hangsa Upanishads teach: in the heart region there is an eight-leafed
lotus. The eight leaves correspond to the compass and portray both
moral and psychic states. At the center lives Vairagya, passionlessness,
disinterest, and detachment (cf. Meister Eckhart).
According to another teaching brahman can be attained from four
cardinal points: these appear separately in the head, neck, heart, and
navel. In the Dhyanabindu Upanishads it is said, “The great and powerful
with the four arms, that is, Vishnu, should be worshiped in the navel.” In
the cakras the elements are cleansed with the help of Kundalini. In Kundalini yoga six cakras, or centers, are distinguished. The first cakra lies
near the perineum and is called mÖlvdhvra. The second is named
svvdiü°hvna and is located in the small pelvis.
The third has its seat in the naval region: it is called maõipÖra. Anvhata
is located near the heart diaphragm. In the neck lies viçuddha. The uppermost center, vjñv, lies in the head between the eyebrows. Still higher
than these corporeal cakras lie some metaphysical cakras: hence the
mana center and above that the soma cakra. This teaching of the cakras
should not be misunderstood as concrete and corporeal like the theosophers tend to do today. These centers are not corporeal entities. When
one speaks of them, it is understood “as if” they were situated somewhere
in the navel, and so on. Two serpent lines lead from mÖlvdhvra to the
vjñv cakra.12 And indeed, one begins in the left testicle and runs around
the cakras to the right nostril. The other has its beginning in the right
testicle and ends in the left nasal opening. This pair of paths are called
iìv and piõgalv (iìv =moon, female; piõgalv = sun, masculine). The one
lying to the left is the moon or water stream, the one to the right is the
sun or fire stream. Besides these, there is also a middle stream, suüumõv (cf. the last picture of the patient).13 The liberation through
knowledge and insight takes place along these paths. The knower becomes brahman.
12 Jung is referring to the nvìzs. For a discussion of these, see Mircea Eliade, Yoga: Immortality and Freedom, translated by Willard R. Trask (Bollingen Series LVI; reprint, London,
1989), 236–41; and Georg Feuerstein, Yoga: The Technology of Ecstasy (Wellingborough,
1990), 259–62.
13 Bericht über das Deutsche Seminar von Dr. C. G. Jung (1930), figure 30. In the preceding
seminars, Jung had commented on the visions of Christiana Morgan. The illustration in
question (not reproduced in The Visions Seminar) depicted a naked woman standing on a
ridge with outstretched arms under a stream of light with a crescent moon. A vertical black
line runs from her genitals to the top of her body. Jung commented: “This strip depicts the
way of the snake, the Kundalini” (92; my translation).

75

APPENDIX 1
T H E I N D I V I D U A L C A K R A S (figures 2–7)
mÖlvdhvra is the lowest, the center of the earth. It has its seat in the perineum. What is in mÖlvdhvra is unconscious, latent, dormant. åiva-bindu
lies at the middle point; around it Kundali-çakti is coiled up as a snake.
Bindu corresponds to the self-generated li´gam around which the serpent lies. A shell surrounds both; this shell is Mvyv. When Kundalini
awakens, consciousness of the world arises. In herself, åakti is of course
also conscious beforehand; she creates the world through imagination
corresponding to the copies of saôskvras. Kundalini, however, awakens
only when hunger drives her. This hunger arises as a consequence of
spiritual discipline, through the appeasement of pairs of opposites.14
When the external process has finally come to rest, the internal begins.
Kundali-çakti springs up, whereby her head becomes light. This is the
process of becoming conscious.15 The symbolic animal of the mÖlvdhvra
cakra is the elephant, the image of firmness and strength, the earth. The
yoni is in the mÖlvdhvra mandala represented as traispura, a female triangle united with the li´gam, which is also termed the leaf.16
The second center is svvdiü°hvna, the seat of error and desire. It is
located in the small pelvis corresponding to the genital region.
Svvdiü°hvna corresponds to the water sphere and rules the bladder. Its
animal is a water monster. The mandala portrays a red six-leaved lotus
and the moon.
The maõipÖra cakra has its seat in the navel region. This is the place of
fire and of pairs of opposites. These generate emotions and passions.
Through concentrating on the navel, anger is suppressed. MaõipÖra “is
lustrous as a gem.”17 MaõipÖra is at the same time the center of the re14 [Note to the 1932 edition: In the mystery play of the patient, the Indian stands untouched in the middle between fire and water.] See Interpretation of Visions vol. 1, 8 December 1930, 147.
15 [Note to the 1932 edition: “When a yogi, whose mind is under control, is able to confine the moon in her own place, and also the sun, then the moon and the sun become
confined, and consequently the moon cannot shed its nectar, nor can the sun dry it. . . .
Then the Kundali awakens for want of food and hisses like a serpent. Afterward, breaking
through the three knots, she runs to Sahasrvra and bites the moon, which is in the middle
of it.”]
16 [Note to the 1932 edition: Cf. the portrayals of the cakra mandalas (figures 2–7). A
young Muslim whom Dr. Jung tested for his knowledge of the Koran cited three forms of
the appearance of the Chidr: 1) it appears as a man; 2) it appears as white light; and 3) it
is in everything that surrounds you and that you touch—in the stone, in the wood, and also
in here. And there the native pointed to a young sprouting verdure.]
17 Woodroffe, The Serpent Power, 119.

76

INDIAN PARALLELS
gion of the flesh, the corporeal human being, the meat eater. (åakti
Laktini with breasts red from blood and running with animal fat.) The
ram, vehicle of Agni, is its animal.
Anvhata is the fourth center. It pertains to the heart, or rather to the
midriff. Here, in the air, vvju praõaçakti (prvõa = pneuma) has his seat.
Here lives puruüa, the conscious human being. From there one sees the
vtman, and the yogi now knows, “I am it.” In anvhata the prospective
spirit is born; it starts becoming conscious. The accompanying symbol is
the kalpataru tree, which fulfills all wishes. Below it is the manipitha
altar.18
The fifth cakra is viçuddha: it lies in the neck, particularly in the larynx.
Here lies the seat of speech, and thereby the spiritual center. It is “the
purple center of the white ether [akasha] which sits on the white elephant.” åakti-çvkinz is now white, and åiva appears in androgynous form,
half white, half golden. Together they celebrate the mystical union.
Viçuddha is the lunar region and at the same time the “gateway of the
great liberation” through which man leaves the world of error and the
pairs of opposites. Akasha means the fullness of the archetypes; it concerns a renunciation of the world of images, a becoming-conscious of
eternal things.19
ujñv is the sixth and highest corporeal center. (ujñv = knowledge, understanding, command). It is located between the eyebrows.20 Here the
command of the leader, the guru, is received from above. In the vjñv
mantra the lotus is portrayed with two white leaves.21 The yoni triangle is
reversed: it is white, and in the middle of it, itara-li´ga sparkles like lightening. utman here shines like a flame. It is the pure, universal power in
the form of a phallus. The mantra attached to the vjñv cakra is Om. In
the sixth cakra lies the seat of mahat (mind22) and prakùiti. Here the “subtle body,”23 the diamond body, develops (cf. The Secret of the Golden
18 [Note to the 1932 edition: “Thy blissful form, O Queen, manifests in Anvhata and is
experienced by the mind inward turned of the blessed ones, whose hair stands on end and
whose eyes weep with joy.”]
19 [Note to the 1932 edition: The anthroposophical expression of the akashic records is
misleading, since it is not the case of the inheritance of certain isolated experiences but of
that of the psychic possibilities of having such experiences.]
20 [Note to the 1932 edition: cf. the vision of the patient, 54. Likewise, Jung and Wilhelm,
The Secret of the Golden Flower.] In the vision in question, a ray of light strikes a child on the
forehead, imprinting a star. See The Visions Seminar, vol. 1, 9 December 1930, 151.
21 [Note to the 1932 edition: The vision of a yogi: white fire that rises into the brain and
flares up and beyond as a blaze whose wings reach out both sides of the head.]
22 In English in the original.
23 In English in the original.

77

APPENDIX 1
Flower)—that being which Goethe termed “Faust’s Immortal.” It is portrayed individually as taijasa and collectively as hiranyagarhba, the golden
seed (Orphic: the world egg), the “great self.” At the hour of death,
prvõa is removed from the yoni into the vjñv cakra, from which it passes
over into the godhead, into timelessness, into nirvvõa—into those cakras
situated above the corporeal, in the “house without foundation,” on the
“island in the ocean of nectar.”
Now followed the display of a series of unconscious images which were
painted by different patients and which illustrate the Western parallels
to the preceding observations concerning Indian psychology.
TRANSLATED BY MICHAEL MÜNCHOW

78

APPENDIX 2
JUNG’S COMMENTS IN HAUER’S
GERMAN LECTURES

5 October 1932

Dr. Jung wants to make some remarks on meditation technique: the process of meditation has a clear parallel in psychological analysis, though
with the difference that Professor Hauer gives us a completed conceptual framework, seen from above, as if floating in ether. If we place it on
a foundation which, to begin with, we possess through our own experience, it will become more readily understandable. To be sure, it is
difficult to compare the somber, earthbound figures of our unconscious
with the Indian representation. To meditate on the cakras we first have
to extricate the original experience; hence we cannot adopt the readymade figures of yoga, and the question still remains whether our experiences fit into the tantric forms altogether. It all thereby depends on
whether we possess this matter which India already has. That is why we
have to come up with our own methods which can familiarize us with
corresponding contents.
Ten or fifteen years ago, when patients brought me the first “mandalas,” I did not yet know anything about tantra yoga. At this time Indologists were not familiar with it either—or, whenever it became known, it
was scorned not only by the Europeans but also by wide sections of the
Indian population. Its seeming oddity was only sniffed at. But we have to
forget this sniffing at it now.
It is a fact that with us these things come individually and immediately
out of the earth, but as small, ridiculous beginnings which we find hard
to take seriously.
Example: we are dealing with a (female) patient with whom, after six
years of sporadic analysis, I had finally, if very hesitatingly, to take the
79

APPENDIX 2
“yoga path.” She was a practicing Catholic. Catholics have a stillborn unconscious, because the church has already entirely formed, regulated,
and squeezed the nature of the unconscious. There is early evidence for
this. Archbishop Athanasius of Alexandria,1 for example, in his biography of St. Antonius, gives his monks instructions about what from the
unconscious is good and bad. He says that the devils can also speak
“words of truth” and that they can talk about things that are true. But, he
states,
It would be a disgrace for us, if those who revolted against God
should become our teachers. Let us arm ourselves with the armour
of justice and let us put on the helmet of redemption, and at the
time of battle let us shoot mental arrows from a faithful mind. Because the devils are nothing, and even if they were something, their
strength would comprise nothing which could resist the might of
the cross.2
Also, the religious exercises of Ignatius of Loyola3 are Christian counterparts to the Indian meditations or to our fantasies from the unconscious. The religious exercises are meditations according to church instruction; their purpose is the rehearsal of the symbols of faith. By it the
vanishing of all thoughts and fantasies that are dogmatically unacceptable is provoked.
By means of such an attitude a complete paralysis developed in my
patient—everything was already there on the outside, and hence had become invisible inside. I tried for six years to analyze her back into the
church, so to speak, until she confessed what she would not have confessed to a confessor: that she believed neither in God nor in the pope
but that nonetheless she would die in the fold of the church. Despite her
age (she was fifty-five years old at that time), it made her suffer that everything in her was dead and dark, for after all she was still alive, and this life
was asserting its rights. I was in a fix, because I saw that the living spirit
wanted to get its way in spite of everything, and then came the original
experience.
1 [Note to the 1933 edition: See Jung, Psychologische Typen, 2d ed., 78ff.] (I.e., CW, vol. 6,
§§82ff.)
2 In CW, vol. 6, §82, this passage is cited from “Life of St. Anthony,” in The Paradise or
Garden of the Holy Fathers, compiled by Athanasius, archbishop of Alexandria, et al., translated by E.A.W. Budge (London, 1904), 24ff. The passage here has been directly rendered
from the German.
3 In 1939–40 Jung devoted his Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule seminars to a
commentary on the spiritual exercises of Ignatius of Loyola, which followed from his commentary on Eastern texts. See Modern Psychology 4.

80

JUNG'S COMMENTS IN HAUER'S GERMAN LECTURES
I instructed her thus to observe whether images were appearing before falling asleep, and I asked her about dreams. Until then she had
been dreaming, but from the time of my question onward she did not
dream any more. Therefore I told her to lie down and close her eyes, and
now she had a vision: she saw a dark wall. She had to hold on to this
image, concentrate on it (dhvrvõa), contemplate it—“impregnate it,” so
that it could become animated.
As she did so, the wall was divided into trees—it became a dark jungle,
then figures started to move beneath the trees. It was in New Mexico,
and the figures were an entire tribe of [American] Indians. The Indian
archetype of the American had been animated in her.
A lake appeared before the forest. (The forest, the original home of
humanity, represents the unconscious. The lake, with its even surface
impenetrable to the eye, is also an image for it.) The Indians loosened
canoes from the lakeside, loaded women and children into them, and
crossed the lake. On the other side was a desert; the Indians put up their
tents there, made a fire, cooked, ate, and then retired to the tents. They
evidently went to sleep, even though it was broad daylight and the sun
stood motionless in the sky. Only the chief remained outside and turned
his face to the sand desert.
Here you see the world of citta—figures which the patient has not
made and that live their own lives “willfully,” according to their own laws.
The patient now repeatedly concentrated on the chief, but he did not
move. Nothing at all happened any more. The patient had evidently arrived at the dogmatic wall, which puts before the individual experience
of the unconscious all punishments of hell.
At least the relief was great enough that she could live for a year
through the effect of the image, which she never lost from sight now.
At the same time, there also developed attempts to break off—she saw,
for example, heavy transport vehicles in a sandstorm, or horsemen in
a snowstorm. These images are a side-elucidation of the danger, in
which she found herself through the contact with the unconscious. But
such a break is not permitted, because the story has to be brought to its
end. The patient has to stick with it and try to make progress with the
Indian.
After a year she came back to analysis; and one day she was particularly
impressed by the calm, dry, clear desert air in which the Indian was
standing. Suddenly she felt a bit of humidity in the air which had not
been there before. Something had finally moved, and it stirred her to
the extent that again she could continue to live for a year.
When after this time she came back to me, she told me that the Indian
81

APPENDIX 2
was not there any more; he had faded. Where had he gone? She had a
second vision, and the first one had been dissolved in the second: a white
serpent appeared to her in splendor and imperturbable majesty, wearing feathers and a diadem.
Personally she was in no way aware of what this image signified. It is
the well-known representation of the Mexican air and wind god Quetzalcoatl in his shape as a feathered serpent (the Plumed Serpent). He is the
redeemer-god of the Indian, who embodies for the psyche of the American person the unconscious spirit.
This vision impressed my patient tremendously and gave her the courage, after ten years, finally to make her general confession to me—with
which the therapeutic effect was, of course, achieved.
What had actually happened? The humidity had descended as dew
and had fertilized and burst the wrapping of the Indian. He now showed
her his actual meaning, his undogmatic pagan face. From the point of
view of the church, it was the appearance of a devil, who had merely
assumed the form of the redeemer to mislead the Christian. Thus the
Spanish conquerors of Yucatan already interpreted the crosses that they
found all over the country as a seduction of the devil. The early Christians, as well, who recognized the similarity between the myth of Dionysus and the life of Christ, thought that the devil had invented this
Anticipatio Christi expressly to confound them.
What the patient actually did during her analysis was really pÖjv—persisting in prayer—which then caused the transformation. Laya, the redissolution of the figures, would for us correspond to the intellectual process of comprehension. The patient has to know what has happened to
her; she has to understand her own myth. The image would capture and
detain us, if we would not dissolve it through comprehension. Only
when we have assimilated it to the height of consciousness can new
figures emerge.
6 October 1932
Dr. Jung: What one could still add here, from the psychological side, is
the purely empirical results of the analysis.4 In every typical course of an
analysis greater awareness emerges through realizing repressions, projections, and so on. The analytical process thus occasions a broadening
4 These remarks follow a discussion of the process of the development of consciousness
in yoga. Tantra Yoga, 50–51.

82

JUNG'S COMMENTS IN HAUER'S GERMAN LECTURES
of consciousness, but the relation of the ego to its objects still remains.
The ego is intertwined in conflict with the objects—one is still a part of
a process. Only in the continuation of the analysis does the analogy with
yoga set in, in that consciousness is severed from its objects (Secret of the
Golden Flower). This process is linked up with the process of individuation, which begins with the self severing itself as unique from the objects
and the ego. It is as if consciousness separated from the objects and from
the ego and emigrated to the non-ego—to the other center, to the foreign yet originally own. This detachment of consciousness is the freeing
from the tamas and rajas, a freeing from the passions and from the entanglement with the realm of objects. This is something which I cannot
prove philosophically any further. It is a psychical experience, which in
practice is expressed as a feeling of deliverance. What has caused one to
be previously seized with panic is not a panic any more; one is capable of
seeing the tension of opposites of the world without agitation. One does
not become apathetic but is freed from entanglement. Consciousness is
removed to a sphere of objectlessness. This experience has its effects in
practical life, and indeed in the most palpable way. It is illustrated probably most beautifully in the tale of Buddha being threatened by Mara.
Mara and all his demons assail him, but the throne of Buddha is empty—
he is simply not sitting there any more. Or as Rig Veda I, 164, has it: “Two
closely united friends both embrace one and the same tree. One of them
eats the sweet berry, the other looks down only composedly.”5
*
Dr. Jung: One has to take into account here the differences between the
cases in question, because what the symbols mean is entirely dependent
on the particular state of consciousness of the individual.6 The tree is the
tree of life. If it is standing up it is an indication of an unfolding and
progressing life. When the “yoga path” is taken, one can find this symbol
at the beginning. It also appears when doubts exist about the value of the
path. The “yoga path” is the path of the plant—a plant function as opposed to an animal one. Ego consciousness is, so to speak, like an animal
that can speak and move freely. The tree, however, signifies the notbeing-able-to-make-way and the rootedness of the plant. When someone
realizes this, he suddenly has the feeling: “Now I am imprisoned.” The
5 Cf. The Rig Veda: An Anthology, translated by Wendy Doniger O’Flaherty (London,
1981), 78, where a slightly different rendition of the same passage is given.
6 Hauer and Gustav Heyer had related accounts of dreams that featured trees. Tantra
Yoga, 52.

83

APPENDIX 2
image of the uprightly growing tree then placates his fear, which sees
something frightening in the unavoidable.
When the path has already been taken, however, and the conviction of
growth has been consolidated, then the Christian prejudice comes: what
grows has to grow upward. Then the image of the tree can appear with
the roots on top, showing that its growth does not go up into the sky but
downward into the depth.
There is also the tree with roots on top and at the bottom. Here it is
emphasized that one gets to roots wherever one goes. This is what someone dreams who wishes or hopes for too much. He is being told, “Everything around you is earth, and with the earth you are supposed to form
a union.”
Conversely, the tree can have crowns on top and at the bottom; here
everything is leaf and blossom and fruit—“heaven above, heaven below.”
Also, when the development apparently leads downward, the tree will
still bear blossoms and fruit. I could substantiate this for each of the
cases.

8 October 1932
Dr. Jung: Professor Zimmer has depicted the material as relatively simple
to us.7 I find it highly complicated—an ocean of individual differences,
so ill defined that one cannot touch it anywhere! Individual problems
cannot be understood in uniqueness; thus one is thankful for all references, such as Zimmer’s book Artistic Form and Yoga in the Sacred Images of
India, or the translation of the tantric texts by Avalon, which show that
there have always been people with such problems. The Indian conceptual world was thus for me a means to clarify personal experiences.
In 1906 I found in a mentally ill patient for the first time the image of
a serpent, creeping up on her back, its head divided into a crotch. In
1909 I even gave a lecture on this case without being aware of its general
signification.
After the war a twenty-eight-year-old girl came to see me, wanting to be
cured within ten hours. She said that she had a black serpent in her belly.
She came to see me because of this serpent, for she thought that it
should be awakened. Her problem was that she was not on earth. She was
7 Zimmer had given an account of yoga practice as a process of self-transformation. Tantra Yoga, 97–100.

84

JUNG'S COMMENTS IN HAUER'S GERMAN LECTURES
only intuitive, entirely without a sense of reality. She was living in a secret
brothel without being aware of it; she did not hear her own steps and had
never seen her body. She dreamed that she was inside or on top of balloons, from which I had to shoot her down. One day she came and said
that the serpent in her belly had moved; it had turned around. Then the
serpent moved slowly upward, coming finally out of her mouth, and she
saw that its head was golden. This is the shortest Kundalini path of which
I have heard. To be sure, it was not experienced but only intuited; but
already this had a curing effect for the time being. This case is a simple
example of the spontaneous appearance of the Kundalini.
I got to know about the cakras only later, but even then I did not say
anything about it, so as not to disturb the process in my patients.
The cakras are symbols for human levels of consciousness in general.
Ethnically and psychologically we can distinguish three different psychical localizations, of which the first corresponds more or less to mÖlvdhvra-svvdhiü°hana, the second to maõipÖra and anvhata, and the third to
viçuddha and vjñv. The psychology of the lower centers is analogous to
the one of primitives—unconscious, instinctive, and involved in participation mystique. Life appears here as an occurrence, so to speak, without ego. One is not aware that one wants or does things; everything happens as it were in the third person.
The next localization is in the region of the diaphragm, thus maõipÖraanvhata, with oscillations up and down, above and beneath the diaphragm. Beneath the diaphragm, all occurrence is self-evident. In
maõipÖra is the emotional human being, who again and again is inundated and becomes constantly the victim of his passions.
Only above the diaphragm is it: I want. In the heart—anvhata—is the
first notion of the self, of the absolute center, the substance to which life
is related. This notion of the self is the flame in anvhata. Here the rational functions start. We have figures of speech that still now express
this. We say “cross my heart,” or we beat our chest when we refer to ourselves. The Pueblo Indian thinks in his heart, as does the Homeric person, whose spirit is located in the diaphragm (Phren—the emotional and
thinking soul). Our psychical localization is admittedly in the head, but
the gesture is still archaic, and when emotions become involved, our psychology slips down to maõipÖra.
But most of the time we do not notice this. We believe ourselves to live
in the vjñv center; we are convinced that we are masters in our own
home. But if we believe that our thoughts are our epiphenomenology
and that we have had them, we all too easily forget how often our
85

APPENDIX 2
thoughts have us. By thinking that psyche and brain are identical we become godlike, but our emotions bring the lower centers in us again into
effectiveness.
In history we can also watch the Kundalini process. First the belly-consciousness of the primitive developed, and he only noticed what set
heavy on his belly or in his stomach. Paul still said, “The belly is your
God.” Then the diaphragm-consciousness of the Homeric person developed, and he felt his emotions. This was expressed in states of respiratory
tension and in changes in the heartbeat.
Only the modern Western person has noticed that the head can also
be affected. Before that, it had not been much more than a button on a
feeling body. How much this was really the case, we can see clearly in the
representations of humans on the rock paintings of Negroes, which Leo
Frobenius, for example, has reproduced in his book Erythräa.8 You will
find images there of humans with extraordinarily long bodies on which,
to some extent very small, or by way of suggestion, human or animal
heads are placed.
Only the contemporary person can say: “Now I am thinking.” The
viçuddha center expresses the word, and what surpasses this would be the
center of abstraction.
I would like to point to one more important analogy. In all cases which
involve such symbols, we may not forget the course of the sun as a main
motive. The analogy to Kundalini is the sun serpent, which later in Christian mythology is identified with Christ. The twelve disciples are thought
of as stations of the annual cycle supported by the zodiac serpent. All
these are symbols for the change of the creative power. In mÖlvdhvra is
the night sun, and beneath the diaphragm the sunrise. The upper centers starting from anvhata symbolize the change from midday up to
sunset. The day of sun is the Kundalini passage—ascent and descent—
evolution and involution with spiritual signs. The course of the sun is the
analogy to the human life course.
The cakras, moreover, are, like all symbolic step formations, also the
steps of mysteries, where the beginner steps into the dark (katabasis) and
comes up again as deus sol via seven steps, as Apuleius describes it in The
Golden Ass.
The greatest difficulties for my comprehension were caused by the
god in bindu and åakti. With us, the anima always first appears so grotesque and banal that it is difficult to recognize the åakti in it. But then,
what is God? He is the pale reflection of the ever-invisible central god in
8 Leo Frobenius, Erythräa: Länder und Zeiten des heiligen Königsmordes (Berlin, 1931).

86

JUNG'S COMMENTS IN HAUER'S GERMAN LECTURES
bzja, which one cannot grasp, who is like the rabbit which the hunter
never hunts down. That is the self—incomprehensible, because it is bigger than the ego. This self has a faint reminiscence in us—that is the god
in bindu. The god in bindu is our relation to the self, the will in the ego,
the daimon, which forces us through need to take the path—the small
individual god—the inner åiva.9
TRANSLATED BY KATHERINA ROWOLD
9 Hauer then stated that although he thought Jung’s account of the psychophysical centers was correct, it left out the metaphysical aspect. Tantra Yoga, 103.

87

APPENDIX 3
HAUER’S ENGLISH LECTURE
8 October 1932

Professor Hauer: Would you like to ask any questions about yesterday’s
discussion?
Dr. Shaw: May I say that it seems to me that if we can only awaken the
Kundalini when we get to the beginning of the sixth stage on the road
through the cakras,1 where we are not able to see her, that we would be
as far out of reality as the East. We should have something simpler, a
mixture of earth.
Professor Hauer: As I told you, my conception rests upon the classical
text of the ûa°-cakra-nirÖpaõa and on a number of the Upanishads, where
it is quite clear to me that the full awakening can take place only after
the yogin has gotten to the end of viçuddha—he must be purified,
cleansed—and to the beginning of vjñv, the stage where the great intuitions appear.
I said yesterday that it was a hypothesis. You must work on it not with
the help of Avalon or the modern Indian writers but from the original
texts which give us the historical development of perhaps a thousand
years. Most of our writings now are of a very late date, and the original
meaning is concealed. In the course of the historical evolution all sorts
of things have accrued and been superimposed on the original. My
intention is to get at the original always because I am sure that is nearer
to us than the yoga evolved in India as it fares now, or a hundred years
ago.
It is the same with the classical yoga. I have to take it out of the yoga
1 Hauer had stated: “As to the question when it [Kundalini] is to be awakened, I think the
texts have been misunderstood by the commentators not only in the West but also in the
East. They all speak as if she could be awakened at any time from the beginning onward.
But that is not so. Kundalini can be awakened only after the yogin has mastered all the
limbs of yoga up to samvdhi, the eight limb or step of yoga. Only after he has finished the
whole course, and has achieved all the changes within that are to be worked by yoga, only
then can he awaken Kundalini” (HS, 96).

88

HAUER'S ENGLISH LECTURE
Sutras,2 with the help of Vyasas’s commentary, the Yogabhvsya. What I
have explained to you is Kundalini at the highest stage. In the evolution
of the yogin there is always the union of both the man and woman powers. This union is symbolized by the triangle and the li´ga, as you know
already. We have the fact that there is always woman power working in
the growth of knowledge through man power, but only at three stages
does the aspect of woman power appear under the symbol of the triangle. That means there are epochs in our inner development in which
woman power plays a very important role. And certainly the erotic aspect
of woman power has something to do with the awakening of knowledge.
I call that the gross Kundalini—instead of the very sublime, subtle, spiritual Kundalini. A number of yoga texts, Hatha yoga, and the yogins
themselves, in speaking about the awakening of Kundalini, really mean
the awakening of that creative element in woman power which accompanies man power all through. But in the ûa°-cakra-nirÖpaõa, as I have
shown, only the subtle, sublime woman power is symbolized by Kundalini. So for the West, and even for India as it is now, we may say that the
awakening of Kundalini is just the awakening of the power that is influencing man’s development all through; but this is not the Kundalini. We
must be clear about the fact that there are the two aspects of the woman
power, and that when the Kundalini is crawling up a certain distance, we
have not awakened the real Kundalini.
Mrs. Crowley: That explains it! I could not understand why the two processes were not going on simultaneously—because that is the thing that
awakens her.
Professor Hauer: I want to put it very emphatically that the awakening of
Kundalini, as we usually talk about it, is only a preliminary to the awakening which is waiting in vjñv. We are certainly still very far from it, if we
take the evolution of our psychic state in general, but it lies ahead of us.
Now, the return of the Kundalini after she has united with åiva (which
means to be united with the inner self, you know) symbolizes the fact
that intuition has dawned upon man; when the union of these two powers has taken place in vjñv, then all the regions of the psychic life are
permeated by that power. So now she can go down even to the lowest, to
the erotic, region. It is a different thing if a man lives an earthly life after
he has awakened the Kundalini; it may seem to be the same, but it is absolutely different from his former experience, it is new. We may look at a Japanese
parallel for a moment. I wonder whether you know the book Ten Essays
2 The reference is to the yoga sutras of Pantanjali, which Hauer translated in his Der Yoga
als Heilweg (Yoga as a way of salvation) (Stuttgart, 1932).

89

APPENDIX 3
in Buddhism by Suzuki. In it is an essay with pictures called “The Ten
Cow-Herding Pictures,” the cow being the symbol for the last reality.
After long seeking, the disciple finds the cow, which means that he gets
hold of his innermost reality. Then a most important feature, which is
not clearly worked out in yoga, is that after he has found the cow he no
longer cares for her; he sleeps and does not look after her, he just knows
she is there. That is, after he has had the highest intuition, he does not
always go on looking at it: he lets it drop into the subconscious again as
if there were nothing in it. So he lies there asleep, the sun shining in his
face; and he gets up and goes to town:
Entering the City with Bliss-Bestowing Hands. His humble cottage door
is closed and the wisest know him not. No glimpses of his inner life
are to be caught; for he goes his own way without following the steps
of the ancient sages. Carrying a gourd he goes out into the market,
leaning against a stick he comes home. He is found in company with
wine-bibbers and butchers, he and they are all converted into
Buddhas.
Bare-chested and barefooted, he comes out into the market
place;
Daubed with mud and ashes, how broadly he smiles!
There is no need for the miraculous power of the gods,
For he touches, and lo! the dead trees come into full bloom.3
Now perhaps Dr. Jung will say something about the psychological side.
Dr. Jung: I came here really in order to answer certain questions. Of
course, I am not competent to put these things more clearly in the particular realm of which Professor Hauer speaks, but if you have any questions in regard to the psychological point of view, I would be glad to
answer them. I cannot imagine what is clear to you and what is not.
There is naturally great difficulty in linking up this peculiar terminology
and ideology with our psychological language and processes.
For instance, to take your question “How can Kundalini be aroused?”
It seems to you as if one already had to possess the thing one could possess only afterward in order to awaken Kundalini.
Dr. Shaw: It is as if it were doing just what Dr. Jung says we should not
do. He always stresses so much the value of the earth, the necessity for
both the spiritual and the earthly.
Dr. Jung: Yes, but that is what the yoga says too—it is right in the body,
not in the air.
3 D. T. Suzuki, Essays in Zen Buddhism (first series) (London, 1980), 376.

90

HAUER'S ENGLISH LECTURE
Professor Hauer: Of course, there is a certain reaction against classical
yoga in tantric yoga. Classical yoga wants to stop when the highest intuition is reached; it has altogether a tendency toward letting the world go,
while tantric yoga is just the reaction against that, in the idea that the
Kundalini has to return to mÖlvdhvra. You must also think historically
here in order to understand the danger and the necessity of that high
spiritual life.
Mrs. Crowley: I should like to know Dr. Jung’s psychological opinion
about the difference between the puruüa and the vtman as you presented
it.4
Dr. Jung: From a psychological point of view you hardly can make a
difference between them. They may be all the difference in the world,
but when it comes to psychology they are the same. Even in philosophy
those two concepts have been used in the same way. At least the difference is too subtle for it to play any role in psychology.
Mrs. Crowley: Is the ultimate experience of the vtman (the self) intuitively seen before the puruüa?
Dr. Jung: If you think in those Hindu terms, you lose yourself in ten
thousand aspects; it is exceedingly complicated. To look at it from a psychological point of view is much simpler. It is even much too simplified
when put into words, for, as a matter of fact, when you go through it
yourself, you see how terribly involved and complicated the whole process is—you begin to understand why the Hindus have invented so many
symbols to explain that apparently simple thing. But you put it a very
different way psychologically. What analysis does, then, is first a reduction. It is analyzing your attitude. You must become conscious of many
resistances and personal things which suppress your genuine mental activity or your psychological processes. All these inhibitions are so many
impurities, and your mind must be purified before the psychological
process of transformation can begin.
Therefore yoga says one’s citta (mind) must be purified before one
can even think of beginning the way of the Kundalini. It is the same in
analysis. You must clarify the mind until you have perfect objectivity,
until you can admit that something moves in your mind independently
of your will—for instance, until you can acknowledge a fantasy objec4 Hauer had stated that vtman and puruüa were both terms that could be translated as the
self. The former term was used in the Upanishads and tantric yoga, and the latter in classical
yoga: “The puruüa in classical yoga is just an entity by itself; there are innumerable such
puruüas in the world, and the divine ego is just one of them . . . whereas in tantric yoga the
aspect is somewhat different; in vtman there is a part of the Absolute, it is the appearance
of the absolute on one point of the whole” (HS, 43–44).

91

APPENDIX 3
tively. You must remove a lot of inhibitions before you are capable of
admitting that, and until then no objective psychological process can
take place. But when you can admit that the psychical contents have
autonomy, that the idea comes not because you invented it but by its
own autonomous action, then you can see how the thing moves. Then
the objective process can begin. Then later the self, the puruüa, can be
awakened.
Mrs. Crowley: Exactly that. There is a great difference between the two
ways.
Dr. Jung: There is the preparatory way and then the real awakening.
You speak of the realization of the vtman, but that is the result. And the
difference between puruüa and vtman I would advise not to make for
practical purposes.
Mrs. Crowley: Except that as you explain it, there seems to be a very
distinct difference.
Dr. Jung: I was speaking of the citta. The first part is an elaboration of
the citta, and the second part is the awakening of Kundalini, and only in
the awakening does the self appear—namely, in the subsequent stages of
the psychological process that begin when you are capable of objectification. There the puruüa appears, but not in the first part.
Professor Hauer: There is no real difference between vtman and puruüa;
they are synonymous terms. The only difference—and there lies the difficulty—is that the self is mirrored in different ways, which is very
much what Dr. Jung has said. You cannot see the self clearly in citta at
first. It is as if it were mirrored in moving water. But then it gets more
and more clear, and in anvhata there is the same self that was seen below
in flashes, but it appears now as the self that cannot be doubted any
longer. Down below, as long as the mirror or the water was moving, it
might be doubted, but now you know it is there; you cannot lose it,
though it is still surrounded by that creative activity, the red color, which
you have still to go through. Up above it is mirrored in tranquility; it is
absolutely clear. Citta is really no more than a mirror of the puruüa.
There are no kleça at that stage. And when that happens there is an absolute presence, the real presence of the self, and then appears the identity of the vtman with the paramvtman. It is a question of being mirrored
in a different way in a citta which is developing.
Miss Hannah: I am in an awful muddle as to what the difference is
between the Western approach and the Eastern. The East apparently
goes through the jaws of the monster, the makara.
Dr. Jung: Professor Hauer gives you a very clear picture of how this
92

HAUER'S ENGLISH LECTURE
problem is tackled in the East,5 and if you study analytical psychology
you know how it is tackled in the West.
Mrs. Sawyer: I think that the confusion comes from people trying to
make the two fit, the East and the West, yoga and analysis.
Dr. Jung: My term for the process which tantric yoga calls the awakening of Kundalini is psychic objectivity. For instance, those visions we are
dealing with in the English seminar are experiences on a different plane:
they are to be considered not from the sthÖla aspect but from the sÖküma
aspect. These things happen in the nowhere; they are universal and impersonal—and if you do not understand them as impersonal, you simply
get an inflation through your identification with the universal. So the
whole process begins with the fact that certain things in the mind are
purely impersonal. You are not responsible for their existence; they drop
down from heaven or come up from hell, and you cannot account for
them in any way. Certain fantasies, certain dreams, are very clearly out of
an impersonal sphere, and they are not produced by any intentional purpose. These are contents which can be experienced only if you assume
that you can dissociate yourself and play a role.
Therefore people always have a tendency to perform mystery plays, to
step out of the ordinary frame of their existence and assume a role. Even
the most primitive aborigines in central Australia have the very elaborate
idea that when they perform their totem rites, it is not as themselves but
as their ancestors in the alcheringa times. They identify themselves with
the divine heroes. I am no longer Dr. Jung, I am Zarathustra, and then
I can say the most outrageous things because I speak with the voice of the
centuries—I am talking under the cloak of a great ancestor, and afterward I take off my paint and am an ordinary citizen again. Now, such a
thing could never live if it did not answer a psychological need; it is simply another reality because it works. Our rationalism simply cannot understand naturally how it is possible but it does work.
For instance, there is the idea that everybody must lead a normal life
and have at least two children. But many people do not have two children, or they have many more, or they do not dream of having children
5 Hauer had stated: “In following the course of this life, you come across that sea monster, the makara; somewhere you will come face to face with a tremendous danger, and you
cannot go past it. This monster is pictured in the cakra as covering the whole width of the
crescent (the crescent in svvdiü°hana stands for åiva), and the jaws of the monster are open.
Now, if you come from the right you may attack the monster from behind. You don’t fall
into its jaws and may be able to grapple with it, whereas if you come from the left, you will
fall into its jaws. It is a question of the right way” (HS, 84).

93

APPENDIX 3
at all. So real life is very irregular, and many things live which should not
live—monasteries, nunneries—they all live, and quite productively,
though it is against the bourgeois rationalism of the nineteenth century.
And so that impersonal kind of experience, where you can experience
as if you were not yourself, as if you were a stage thing, is the intrinsic
element in all mystery plays, and that condition is artificially brought
about. I have often told you of the Mithraic mysteries, in which, in the
initiations, people were changed into milites, the soldiers of the god, and
lions, and the heliodromoi, the sun runners of the god.6 These were simply
different stages of impersonal experience. For instance, a Roman innkeeper who has been made a milxs is afterward not that alone. Of course
not—he is what he always has been, but he has experienced himself on
a higher level that was not identical with the three-dimensional world: an
impersonal level where he was allowed to look out the window into another dimensional way, onto psychical reality.
The proof of that idea is that it works automatically—it drops upon us
like the fires of Sodom and Gomorrah and can destroy our lives, even.
You think you are quite all right and that the world is all right, and suddenly you cannot cross the street any longer because you have agoraphobia. You cannot have invented it, it simply takes you by the neck. And
who does it? We say it is merely a disease, but that is only a word. You can
just as well say that it is an evil spirit causing the fear. That is an example
of the autonomy of the psychic world, and the proof that such things can
live there. Therefore I advise all people who have such a neurosis: go
into it now, live it, and then you have it in your hands and it has not got
you any longer.
Now, the Kundalini yoga is a symbolic formulation of the impersonal
experience in the Eastern way. It would cause us a great deal of trouble
to understand in our Western way what the East tries to convey to us
through its symbolism. Professor Hauer would surely be the last to encourage us in taking these things literally. It is only living when one understands it in the Western way, where it is less simple and also less involved. When you are not clear about things, you always say they are very
simple. The simplest people in the world are really the great world confusers. These things are by no means simple, but it is as well if you have
some straight psychological analogy that will help you to see the connection between the Eastern and the Western experience.
Miss Hannah: The Eastern way seems a trifle dogmatic.
Dr. Jung: Think of the thousands of years, the thousands of individuals,
6 Cf. Jung, Analytical Psychology, 98–99.

94

HAUER'S ENGLISH LECTURE
and the thousands of very good intellectual heads that have worked at it.
Of course it becomes dogmatic.
Miss Hannah: Is psychology already dogmatic?
Dr. Jung: Yes, when people say there is no such thing as the unconscious, and you say, “That is heresy.” Then you are getting dogmatic
under your skin, and you do not notice it—like going black in Africa.7
Miss Thiele: Professor Hauer said yesterday that no European had ever
actually awakened the Kundalini in a higher sense except possibly Suso,8
but would it be possible with the help of the analytical process to get to
the stage at which one might?
Professor Hauer: In a thousand years perhaps.
Dr. Jung: You must never forget that India is a very peculiar country.
The primitive man has lived there since time immemorial and has grown
up in absolute continuity. We have not grown up in continuity. We were
cut off from our roots. Moreover the Hindu is a very different race. Not
only is it Aryan but there is a great deal of the aboriginal influence of
Dravidism. Therefore there are very old chthonic things in the tantric
yoga. So we must admit that this particular yoga philosophy is strange to
our very blood, and whatever we may experience will take an entirely
different turn. We can never take those forms over literally. That would
be a terrible mistake, for to us they are artificial processes.
Remark: I thought some of the process according to our Western conception was similar to that of the Indian yoga.
Dr. Jung: Yes, analytical psychology is, of course, an attempt of a similar
sort. We did not know that there was such a close analogy with tantric
yoga when we were elaborating the beginnings of it. The tantric texts
were not translated, and even the experts on that sort of thing knew very
little of the tantric yoga. Only recently has it become known, through Sir
John Woodroffe’s translations. Our attempt is a perfectly genuine naive
attempt in the same field—of course, with different means, according to
our different temperaments and attitude.
Professor Hauer: You know, you must compare the preparatory work
which is done now by analytical psychology with the stages of yoga four
or five hundred years before it became a system. It first became a system
at the time of Buddha, or not long before. What is being done by analytical psychology was done by the thinkers and brahmins of about five hundred years before Buddha. The names have been lost. We see only little
7 On Jung’s fears of “going black” during his visit to Africa, see MDR, 302.
8 In answer to Dr. Shaw’s question “Do you mean that no one has awakened Kundalini?”
Hauer replied: “No one in the West, I think, but I do not know. . . . I do think that Suso, the
German mystic of the Middle Ages, had the same kind of experience” (HS, 99).

95

APPENDIX 3
flashes of insight coming up, so to speak. One little thing after the other
has been added to their understanding, perhaps, and then there appeared one great mind who created the system whose function it was to
bring into order the minds or souls of that epoch. But only for a time—
say, for a few hundred years. That is the process of psychic adaptation,
which is going on through the whole history of mankind. Christianity,
for example, is no longer valid for us all, so it does not work. In a few
hundred years there will be another system. This will disappear just as
tantric yoga has disappeared. All these systems are human attempts to
grapple with the great problem of life by symbols and sentences which
are not only for you and me but for the whole community. The leading
character of symbols that are valid for a whole community can be
brought about only through the work of centuries. Then each individual
need not do all the original work; it has been done for him—and we get
a common psychic and spiritual culture. But in a few hundred years that
epoch is finished. The symbol changes, or their life changes, and the
danger lies in carrying on with that symbol as valid in the new epoch.
As I look at analytical psychology, it is working from the bottom toward
a great building, certainly. Then it will become in a few centuries a most
rigid dogma, and the destroyers will come and say it is all wrong. However, we may be sure that every system has gotten at some truths, which
are lasting. We see that there is something true in the Christian; there
are absolute realities which cannot be dispensed with. And yet we must
find a new system of truths and symbols. It is the same in India. Historically tantric yoga is only an adaptation of the thousand-year-old yoga to
a new psychic situation, and that situation has disappeared from India. If
they try to work out life there according to tantric yoga they may go perhaps just as far wrong as we. Take Gandhi. New symbols must be for the
whole community, and Gandhi is the man who, with a quite new
method, has created those symbols out of the new psychic and spiritual
state. As I told you, when he goes to the ocean and shows a lump of salt
to his people, it is as good as a cakra. They need no cakra. Take the
spinning wheel. Why should they concentrate on a cakra when they see
Gandhi with a spinning wheel? They contemplate it and are carried to a
higher plane of thought—the idea of sacrifice, and so on. That is a new
“tantric yoga,” if you like. And yet, as in Christianity, there are also in
tantric yoga elements which cannot be lost, symbolized truths that are
eternal and universal. And those we study, those are valuable. That is the
pedagogical value of the cakras. And then there are parallel experiences
that are made everywhere and always. I have intentionally not talked of
the psychological parallels of tantric yoga to analytical psychology, for I
96

HAUER'S ENGLISH LECTURE
would mix things up, I suppose. I just put this yoga before you, and you
yourselves can make the comparisons.
Mrs. Crowley: The comparison was illustrated last night in the mandalas
done in the Western way that Dr. Jung showed.9 To me it was like seeing
cakras in the making, the beginning of things in comparison with the
Hindu ones which were already developed.
Professor Hauer: The Indian ones are perfect. Those shown yesterday
are just rough material, out of which perhaps a cakra will grow. And
these illustrations show how in spite of all the differences, the human
soul has a good deal of uniformity always and everywhere.
Dr. Jung: Well, those are cakras.
Professor Hauer: I mean a cakra that is valid for a whole community.
Dr. Jung: Yes, that all needs cooperation, the elaboration of thousands
of people and untold centuries.
Mrs. Crowley: But what was so startling was that the analogy was so complete in the cakras as Dr. Jung developed them one after the other.
Dr. Jung: Just there, tantric yoga is a really invaluable instrument to
help us in classification and terminology, and to create concepts of those
things. That is why the study of tantric yoga is so fascinating.
Mr. Baumann: Professor Hauer said that the yogin had to reach the
vjñv cakra for the Kundalini to be awakened.
Professor Hauer: In that subtle sense, that spiritual sense, let us say.
Mr. Baumann: In analysis there is a preparatory stage—one must get
rid of personal inhibitions and so on—and then you reach the impersonal. I think it is possible—it really happens, that patients make impersonal drawings when they are still in the first stage.
Dr. Jung: Oh yes, you can make the most marvelous drawings and you
are nowhere at all. Particularly artists. Anybody can make drawings, even
little children, and it means precious little. You see, the drawing must be
an expression of a fact, of a psychological experience, and you must
know that it is such an expression, you must be conscious of it. Otherwise
you might just as well be a fish in the water or a tree in the woods. For
every plant makes marvelous mandalas. A composite flower is a mandala,
it is an image of the sun, but the flower does not know it. The human eye
is a mandala, but we are not conscious of it. So it requires long and painstaking work in analysis to get people to the point where they become
conscious of the impersonal character of the problem. And that impersonal thing is really the Western analogy to the Eastern mind. Kundalini
9 “Westliche Parallelen zu den Tantrischen Symbolen” (Western parallels to tantric symbols), in Tantra Yoga. Jung had used many of these mandalas in his “Commentary on ‘The
Secret of the Golden Flower,’ ” in CW, vol. 13.

97

APPENDIX 3
is an impersonal thing, and it is extremely difficult for our Western mind
to grasp the impersonal in our mind as an objective happening.
I will give you an example. I was once treating a writer, a very clever
fellow. He was intelligent and very rational and explained everything to
the rule: everything had its natural cause, and everything was reasonable.
He had had a great deal of analysis with people of all the different
schools, and he used to explain his dreams according to the principles of
causal reduction. Of course, you can say of practically every figure or fact
or emotion that it comes from some definite experience, and hardly ever
do you come across something which has not been in your experience
before. Naturally one goes on as long as one can with this kind of thinking. I thought that finally the dreams would bring up something that
could not be reduced, and after a long time of working together, he did
have dreams in which figures appeared that he could not trace. For instance, he dreamed a great deal of women, as they played an important
role in his life. Formerly he was able to trace them in reminiscences, to
say, “She looks something like Mrs. So-and-So,” so we were able to stitch
the whole thing together. But then a woman appeared whom we could
not stitch together. He took the utmost pains to find the memory images, and finally he had to give up; he found absolutely no association,
and he had to admit that he was unable to show a reasonable origin for
that figure. So I said, “Here we are at the end of your principle of causal
reduction. Now I propose something entirely different—that this thing
has not had its origin in your personal experience but is coming in all by
itself, just as if somebody were walking into this room whom we had not
invited, or as if she were stepping out of the wall—she walks, she talks—
she must be a ghost.” Naturally he had resistance against that proposition. He said things could not come into his mind which had not been
there. He had that depreciation of the psychic world which is part of our
Western attitude. But he had to admit that something very definite had
come up in his mind which he had not invented and which caused him
great emotion in his dreams. That was the beginning of the recognition
of the objective autonomous factor and the beginning of the psychological process. It was as if a real woman had come into his life—he did not
know why she existed, but he had to deal with her existence. I invented
the term anima in order to designate such figures, which, according to
our Western prejudice, should not be.
Now, this is the moment where the analogy with the Kundalini process
begins, when something stirs up and develops all by itself. If that process
is followed up on, one arrives at results which can be expressed in terms
98

HAUER'S ENGLISH LECTURE
of tantric yoga. We are grateful to tantric yoga because it gives us the
most differentiated forms and concepts by which we are able to express
the chaotic experiences that we are actually undergoing. As Professor
Hauer rightly puts it, we are at the beginning of something, and in the
beginning things are exceedingly individual and chaotic. Only after centuries do they begin to settle down and crystallize into certain aspects;
and then, of course, dogma inevitably follows.
Mr. Baumann: Dr. Jung mentioned yesterday receiving a mandala in a
letter from a patient in which there were fish around the center. It made
a great impression on me when she said: “I hope I may find a state where
I am like a center, with the fishes whirling around me.”10
Dr. Jung: No, it was to find a way a center around which she could move
like those fish in harmonious order; she would not be the center. That
is our Western idea. It is a mistake to think that we are the center. We
think we are gods of our world, and therefore the tantric yoga idea that
one becomes a god is dangerous for us. We start with that prejudice. But
we are really devilish, awful things; we simply do not see ourselves from
the outside. We think we are very wonderful people, highly respectable
and moral, and so on, but in reality we are bloody pirates. What the European thinks of himself is a lie. I learned my lesson from the Red Indian
and from the Negro. Look at our world, and you see what we are. But our
prejudice being that we are gods, when anybody dreams of a center he
quietly and instinctively puts himself in it. You remember, possibly, the
picture that I showed you last evening—the central stone and the little
jewels round it. It is perhaps interesting if I tell you about the dream in
connection with it. I was the perpetrator of that mandala at a time when
I had not the slightest idea what a mandala was, and in my extreme modesty I thought, I am the jewel in the center, and those little lights are
surely very nice people who believe that they are also jewels, but smaller
ones. That is what we do—we are always following the example given
by Anatole France in L’Isle des Pingouins (The island of penguins).11
St. Malo had baptized the penguins in the heavenly concilium, and when
they asked St. Catharine what they should do about the penguins’ souls,
she said to God: “Donnez-leur une âme mais une petite” [Give them a
soul, but a small one]. That is our principle. I gave them a little soul; I
10 It is likely that Jung showed the mandala by a woman, with fish radiating out from a
central circle, reproduced in “Commentary on ‘The Secret of the Golden Flower,’ ” in CW,
vol. 13, figure A2. The remarks that Baumann cited are not contained in the report of
Jung’s lecture in Tantra Yoga.
11 Anatole France, Penguin Island, translated by E. W. Evans (London, 1948).

99

APPENDIX 3
admitted as much as that. I thought very well of myself that I was able to
express myself like that: my marvelous center here, and I am right in my
heart.
Then I had a dream.12 I was in Liverpool, where I have never been,
actually. It was very dark and dirty; it rained dirt; and I was walking up a
street with certain other Swiss fellows in raincoats. We were talking together, but it was very disagreeable, and I was thinking of a place where
I could get shelter from the rain and the cold.13 We came to a sort of
plateau, a level part of town, where there was a huge and beautiful park.
I did not recognize it at first, but it was the mandala which I demonstrated yesterday. There were intersecting paths, and in the center was a
little lake, in the center of that was an island, and upon the island was a
magnolia tree of that rosy hue, a beautiful tree. And the tree was standing in full sunshine—it was a most glorious picture on a dark rainy night,
that marvelous tree in full bloom; I was fascinated by it. Then suddenly
I discovered that my companions did not notice it; they just walked on
and began to talk about another Swiss who was living at the corner of a
street in Liverpool on the left side of the park. I pictured the place: there
was one single street lamp at that corner, and he was living there in an
apartment house. They said: “He must be a damned fool to live in Liverpool in such a dirty place.” But I thought he must be a tremendously
intelligent fellow, and I knew why he was living there—he knew the secret of that island; he had found the right place.14 Now, Liverpool is the
center of life—liver is the center of life—and I am not the center, I am
the fool who lives in a dark place somewhere, I am one of those little side
lights. In that way my Western prejudice that I was the center of the mandala was corrected—that I am everything, the whole show, the king, the
god. We have come down from that notion. The Hindu, being a primitive man, has no such idea. He never imagines he is not a man to begin
with; therefore in the end he can never become a god. But we have anticipated the divinity, so we have to come down.
12 An account of this dream is found in MDR, 223–24. There it is dated 1927. Additional details from this account are in the notes that follow.
13 “I had the feeling that we were coming from the harbour, and that the real city was
actually up above, on the cliffs. We climbed up there. It reminded me of Basel, where the
market is down below and then you go up through the Totengässchen (“Alley of the
Dead”), which leads to a plateau above and so to the Petersplatz and the Peterskirche”
(MDR, 223).
14 “On one detail of the dream I must add a supplementary comment: the individual
quarters of the city were themselves arranged radially around a central point. This point
formed a small open square illuminated by a larger street lamp, and constituted a small
replica of the island. I knew that the ‘other Swiss’ lived in the vicinity of one of these secondary centres” (MDR, 223–24).

100

HAUER'S ENGLISH LECTURE
Professor Hauer: I will say just a few words more about the form and
symbolism of the cakras, repeating certain points we have already discussed. All those mathematical figures in the cakras, in my opinion, indicate the life of the cosmos and the psychic life as ordered by laws. Then
the idea of the lotus is that the whole psychic life is embodied in an organic center. You remember that on each petal is a letter. The letters are
hummed in meditation, and while humming one should realize the
meaning of each, which is told to you only by a guru. The letters symbolize the growing organic aspect hidden in that particular region. This is
not conscious. Hidden away in each petal is a force which must be realized and brought into connection with the center. The metaphysical and
the metapsychical15 idea is that in the very center of the psychic organism, which is in the very center of the cosmic organism, there is a subconscious sound force that regulates life unconsciously, and one should realize the meaning of that sound power by meditation. It must come up
into the conscious, and if one can let it work in consciousness it becomes
stronger.
The bzja16 also should be realized in meditation. The inner working
force in this bzja is not a clearly developed personality; it is never named.
The bzja simply symbolizes a subconscious power in that element of
which it is the symbol—this is working in one’s psychic foundation—but
it can work with real force only when it is realized by meditation. As you
know, I call that power the bzja-deva.17 Out of this is projected or grows
the bindu-deva, which is the same force but projected out of the unconscious into clear consciousness. But it does not come as clearly into consciousness as the åakti, the woman power. I think there is no question
about it—it has become evident to me—that this is the anima. That hidden man force is combined with the woman force and should work
within us, according to the tantric yoga, and that is realized consciously
in different periods of our lives. This symbolism figuring a great truth I
call a leading symbol, a symbol that has a leading character, such as can
only be found in the course of many centuries.
There is also a color symbolism, of course. You know that red means
15 “Metapsychique” was the term proposed by Charles Richet for the branch of studies
now known in the English-speaking world as parapsychology. See his Traité de Metapsychique
(Paris, 1922).
16 Hauer defined the bzja as follows: “The bzja is the germ of a cakra; the word bzja means
germ” (HS, 80).
17 Hauer had stated: “I distinguish the bzja-deva from the bindu-deva. (These expressions
I have coined myself on the basis of the cakras as I understand them.) The bindu-deva is
always a psychic and spiritual working force . . . ; the bindu-deva is the ruling divinity of that
force” (HS, 81).

101

APPENDIX 3
blood, the powers deep down in the earth. And white means the higher
intuition. Then wherever you find the golden color, you get the idea of
clear insight, though it is not the highest insight. Thus the golden color
in mÖlvdhvra, which is also in the letters on the petals; there is somehow
a subconscious working force of insight in this region. Within the erotic
life a power of insight is working. The erotic seems a way to insight into
the nature of things, and that grows into the spiritual aspect above. Then
the strange thing is that in maõipÖra you have blue letters on blue-gray
petals, and in anvhata the red color of the pericarp is repeated in the
letters on the leaves. Red represents the musical tone there. Anvhata, in
my opinion, symbolizes the creative life—the petals of the lotus are red,
and the power of insight is in the center in that golden triangle. The
musical undertone of that region is alive somehow—life has a different
reality; a blood reality comes from the outside and tries to work its way in
and harmonize the two.
I give you this explanation as a suggestion of how to work on these
things. I may cite here a word of Lao-tzu: “The meaning that you can
think out is not the meaning.”18 Take all I say in this light. Forget everything I tell you, and begin as you must begin. There are different approaches to these things. Of course, I have certain grounds for my explanation, but you must work it out as a riddle that you try and solve. There
may be more than one meaning, just as there might be two correct
meanings of a dream, through what we may call the coincidence of
things in our psychic and our outer life. The outer event and the psychic
event may be quite different, yet they have a similar character and may
be symbolized by the same dream. Perhaps one finds the outer and has
not yet found the inner. It may be the same with cakras: the meaning of
one symbolism runs into another and is discovered only by deep insight.
As I told you, that energetic life is all moving, and only by dipping into
that movement can you get at it. Here we reach things which are rather
difficult to talk about, and the color symbolism is a great help. You sink
into the color, so to speak, and then you find its meaning.
Take the anvhata cakra again. In the center is the triangle, and around
that is the bzja of yam. Then there is the hexagram, consisting of two
interlocked triangles, in dark smoke color, and that is surrounded by the
coloring of the rising sun, and outside that are the twelve red petals of a
18 A rendition of the commencement of the Tao Tê Ching. Arthur Waley translates the
opening lines as: “The way that can be told is not an unvarying way; the names that can be
named are not unvarying names.” The Way and Its Power: A Study of the Tao Tê Ching and Its
Place in Chinese Thought (London, 1934), 141. (Tao has sometimes been rendered as
“meaning.”) Jung had a copy of this translation.

102

HAUER'S ENGLISH LECTURE
still finer red. You remember that the number of the petals increases in
each cakra after the mÖlvdhvra—life unfolds more and more. So it is a
living music of colors. Now try and feel the meaning; or you may use the
intellect as well. All sorts of associations may come up. This bzja yam is the
air or storm bzja, and all around it is the tremendous dark smoke-colored
hexagram, and this beautiful red issues from that. My explanation is that
no real creative power would be there unless there were storm and
chaos. Therefore this is the storm mandala, all dark, and expressing the
psychic state. It may also be a cosmic state; most probably it is. Then it
breaks through the creative power in the middle, and the glowing red
color appears.
Question: May I ask the significance of the absence of the symbol for
man power in some cakras?
Professor Hauer: Man and woman power are clearly defined symbols in
mÖlvdhvra, in anvhata, and in vjñv. The same symbols do not appear in
maõipÖra, svvdhiü°hvna, and viçudhha, though we know the power is always there. The three stages when man and woman power work together
in full strength are the three stages of the erotic life, the creative life, and
the intuitive life, so here we have the yoni and li´ga. But there are intermediate stages. I take svvdhiü°hvna as the region or the psychic state
where we lose ourselves in life—we have no goal, we just want to live.
Then there are the different aspects; every cakra has three aspects. We
have the sthÖla aspect of the flow of water in all that circling round of
water in our bodies, and this sthÖla aspect is expressed in nature by the
sea. Our bodies are only a small counterpart to the whole, the microcosm in the macrocosm. The sthÖla of the psychic state would be the
experience of just losing ourselves in life, and here the woman power
plays a part, for in a hidden way, it is not a regulating force. MaõipÖra I
take as the life on which rests the working of our whole bodily structure.
Here is the fire of digestion. This cakra looks like a tremendous engine.
It would express the economics of our body and of our whole being. And
here also woman does not play a visible role; she remains hidden. Then
above, in viçudhha, you reach the stage of the wise man who has gotten
beyond creative work, one who lives in the pure light of knowledge. (You
remember that beautiful blue circle outside the white bzja ham, surrounded by the dark lotus petals.) But in order to get to the last stage of
intuition, she again comes in, as I have told you in describing Kundalini.
Now the different animals. The elephant always means the carrying
power in India. It comes again in the viçudhha for the same reason. Then
there is the sea monster in svvdhiü°hvna, of which I have tried to explain
the symbolism. And you have the gazelle in the heart lotus. We know
103

APPENDIX 3
from a text in the Hathayogapradipika that the meaning of it is the versatile and fugitive mind. There always is, in that creative region, a tendency
in the intellect to run away; you have to fetter the gazelle of the heart
lotus, and there is the danger of just making jumps in any direction.
These are suggestions toward a method of getting at the symbolism
both through intellectual processes and through feeling. But I think
Dr. Jung will have something to say about its meaning.
Dr. Jung: I can only express my extreme gratitude to you for giving us
the symbolism so beautifully and so clearly. If these things mean something rather different to me, it is of course because my approach to the
question of the cakras was a different one. You know that my first experiences in the field were made at a time when there was no chance of
getting at the teaching of the cakras. When I first touched on the subject,
it seemed to me utterly hopeless; I had the feeling that it was the specific
symbolism of an entirely exotic people, which conveyed nothing to us.
But then I had an extraordinarily difficult case which caused me great
trouble.19 The patient was a girl born in India of European parents.
There was no mixture of blood, she was as European as you are. But the
first six years of her life had been spent in India, where she had had a
Malay nurse who was quite uneducated. There was no teaching of this
sort, these things were completely unknown to her, but somehow these
Eastern ideas got into her unconscious. She could not adapt to European conditions because her instincts refused all along the line; she
would not marry, she would not be interested in ordinary things, she
would not adapt to our conventions. She was against everything, and so
naturally she became very neurotic.20 First she exploded two analysts,
19 Jung provided an extended commentary on this case in his “The Realities of Modern
Psychotherapy” (1937), in CW, vol. 16 (this was added to the second edition of CW, vol. 16,
as an appendix), and reproduced and commented on several of her paintings in “Concerning Mandala Symbolism” (1950), in CW, vol. 9, part 1, figures 7–9, §§656–59. Some significant comments have been appended in the notes that follow.
20 In “The Realities of Modern Psychotherapy” Jung stated: “The patient had been born
in Java. . . . In her dreams there were frequent allusions to Indonesian motifs” (§557). In
“Concerning Mandala Symbolism” he stated: “The patient was born in Dutch India, where
she sucked up the peculiar local demonology with the mother’s milk of her native ayah. . . .
Brought up in India until her sixth year, she came later into a conventional European
milieu, and this had a devastating effect on the flowerlike quality of her Eastern spirit, and
a prolonged subsequent psychic trauma was set up” (§657; translation modified—Hull substituted “Dutch East Indies” for “India”). In “The Realities of Modern Psychotherapy” Jung
noted that she was twenty-five when she came to see him, and listed the following additional symptoms: “[She] suffered from a high degree of emotivity, exaggerated sensitivity,
and hysterical fever. She was very musical; whenever she played the piano she got so emotional that her temperature rose and after ten minutes registered one hundred degrees

104

HAUER'S ENGLISH LECTURE
then she came to me and almost succeeded in blasting me, because I had
to explain to her that I could not understand her dreams at all, two
thirds of them were absolutely dark to me on account of the peculiar
Eastern psychology. She kept on working bravely, and I did the same,
despite the fact that I could not understand—and here and there we got
a little flash of something. She developed an entirely new set of symptoms,21 beginning with a dream which made a tremendous impression
on her: that out from her genital organs came a white elephant. I was
completely baffled, I had never heard of such nonsense—and yet she was
so impressed that she began to carve the elephant in ivory. Then organic
symptoms appeared: she had ulcers in the womb, and I had to send her
to a gynecologist. For months the thing would not heal; they tried everything under the sun, and whenever she had a somewhat obstinate dream
things became worse. For at least five months her condition remained
like that, and then another set of symptoms began. She developed polyuria, an impossible amount of fluid; she could hardly hold the urine.22
Then the same amount of fluid also developed in the colon and intestines, and caused such a rumbling that when I was outside the room and
left the door open I could hear it. It sounded like a little river pouring
down a staircase, and it lasted about ten minutes. With that there were
acute attacks of diarrhea—again floods of water with apparently no provocation; it just happened. At the same time she really loved a man but
could not think of marrying him. And then the thought entered her
head that I, or circumstances, might persuade her to marry and have a
baby, but that was impossible. For a whole year she fought against this
idea, until she developed an entirely new symptom. She felt as if the skull
had become soft on top, as if the fontanelle was opening up—like a child
with an open skull—and that something like a bird was descending from
above with a long beak and going into her through the skull, meeting
something that was coming up from below. When that happened, the
whole thing cleared up, and she married and had babies. That was the
Fahrenheit or more. She also suffered from a compulsive argumentiveness and a fondness
for philosophical hairsplitting that was quite intolerable despite her high intelligence”
(§546).
21 In “The Realities of Modern Psychotherapy” Jung stated: “The first took the form of an
indefinable excitation in the perineal region” (§551).
22 In “The Realities of Modern Psychotherapy” Jung stated: “Psychologically, the symptom meant that something had to be ‘ex-pressed.’ So I gave her the task of expressing by
drawings whatever her hand suggested to her. She had never drawn before, and set about
it with much doubt and hesitation. But now symmetrical flowers took shape under her
hand, vividly coloured and arranged in symbolic patterns. She made these pictures with
great care and with a concentration I can only call devout” (§553).

105

APPENDIX 3
symptomatology of the case, and it was that which forced me to look into
things; I had the idea that something of the sort existed in the East. It was
soon after Avalon’s book The Serpent Power was published,23 and there I
found the parallel. You see, first was the elephant in mÖlvdhvra, second
was svvdhiü°hvna, the water region, and after that the emotional center,
maõipÖra; and then it did not go on continuously—something came
from above, and this brought about the dissolution. At first it was absolutely dark to me; I could not understand what had happened. But subsequently I understood that this was the awakening from above, and she
could then disentangle herself from the maze of the exotic jungle. She
could objectify the Indian psychology that had been grafted upon her
with the milk she drank from that ayah and through the suggestion of
her surroundings. She became liberated by the objectivity and could accept European life. And, quite naturally, she objectified her whole development in the most beautiful mandalas. Now, mandalas are really
cakras, though in our experience there are not just six but innumerable
mandalas. But they really should be arranged like the cakras, one above
the other. The first ones are usually connected with mÖlvdhvra, and then
they gradually come up, and wind up with analogies to the vjñv center,
or even the sahasrvra, the highest, the seventh center—they are really an
equivalent in a way.
Since then I have had a number of experiences, and found a certain
regularity in them: it was quite clear that a certain set of mandalas, or
psychological conditions, belonged to the psychology of the mÖlvdhvra
region, namely, a sort of complete unconsciousness in which one lives
merely instinctively. Then the next is the region of the diaphragm, and
the third is the heart. Now, among the Pueblo Indians in New Mexico I
made friends with an interesting fellow who was the chief of religious
ceremonies. He confessed to me that they believed all Americans were
crazy because they said they thought in the head, whereas the Indians
knew that the normal thing was to think in the heart. I stared at him and
23 The Serpent Power was published in 1919. The copy in Jung’s library is the first edition.
In “The Realities of Modern Psychotherapy” Jung stated: “It is, as you see, quite impossible
that the patient knew the book beforehand. But could she have picked up a thing or two
from the ayah? I regard this as unlikely, because Tantrism, and in particular Kundalini
Yoga, is a cult restricted to southern India and has relatively few adherents. It is, moreover,
an exceedingly complicated symbolic system which no one can understand unless he has
been initiated into it or has at least made special studies in this field” (§559). Jung overestimated the obscurity of Kundalini yoga—for instance, Swami Vivekânanda had included an
account of the cakras and the means of awakening the Kundalini in his Yoga Philosophy:
Lectures Delivered in New York, Winter of 1895–1896, 5th ed. (New York, 1899), without, however going into detail concerning their iconography.

106

HAUER'S ENGLISH LECTURE
then remembered, of course, that it was only in relatively late periods of
civilization that the head was discovered to be the seat of the mind. And
the Pueblo Indians are already civilized—they are really descendants of
our fathers of the Aztec; they have a certain culture. The Greek in Homeric times located his thinking a bit below the heart, in the diaphragm.
Another word for diaphragm is phren, the Greek word for mind; and the
same root is in the name of the mental disease schizophrenia, which
means a splitting of the mind. So in the Homeric days, the physical localization of the mind was in the region of the diaphragm. They were conscious to the extent that they could notice psychological contents inasmuch as those influenced the breathing. And certain Negroes put the
seat of their emotions and thoughts in the belly. They are conscious insofar as they notice contents which affect the functions of the abdominal
intestines. When we have disagreeable thoughts or feelings, our stomachs get upset. We still get jaundice when we repress a violent anger, and
every case of hysteria has trouble in the digestive organs, because originally the most profound and important thoughts were down there. So
those are three localizations of consciousness that are still to be traced
historically, as it were.
The intervening cakras that are characterized by the absence of the
union of the li´ga and the yoni can be traced, too. I have made some
observations lately concerning viçudhha, for instance. The anvhata cakra,
of course, is the air center, which obviously coincides with the fact that
the lungs are situated there; and as it is situated above the diaphragm, it
means that a higher state of consciousness is reached. The heart is always
associated with feelings or with mind; therefore, as I also have seen by
practical experience, anvhata would be a center of consciousness, of feeling and thoughts, which can be blown out in the breath. For feelings also
come out in the breath; you can express them—you press, and out
comes the feeling in the form of sound. That was the original method of
calling to the gods. We have a description of it in the Mithraic liturgy,
where it says: “Hold both your sides and press them with all your might
and shout like a steer,” so that the gods may hear you.24 You see, that is
a kind of conscious feeling and thought expression. Now, this is very
primitive, but most of us are really still about there. We express feelings
and thoughts as if we were just spitting them out, without realizing in the
least what we are doing. You know, many people have not the faintest
idea what they are saying, or what they are doing to other people by thus
exhaling their thoughts and feelings. I see that all the time. So the think24 Cf. Albrecht Dietrich, Eine Mithrasliturgie (A Mithras liturgy) (Leipzig, 1903).

107

APPENDIX 3
ing and feeling life at this stage is not yet so conscious that it deserves to
be called consciousness, which probably accounts for the fact that the
self is only beginning to be visible from the anvhata.
The next stage is the purified condition. You see, the air belongs to
the earth. We are walking about here in the air, but above is the ether
region, which we do not reach, and that is abstract thought expressed in
human language. The ethereal region is the human larynx: speech
comes apparently from the throat, and speech is the life of the word. The
word that leaves one carries the meaning; it is doing things. We are often
tremendously astonished when people flare up and misunderstand what
one says—“and then I said, and she said”—one feels oneself to be entirely innocent; one simply had a thought and cannot understand what
happened afterward. So man has slowly learned that the word has existence; it is like a winged being that takes to the air and has magic effects,
an abstract being, absolutely purified from the admixture of the lower
regions.
Then the strange thing is, I have seen representations of the vjñv, the
highest thing you can imagine, something which is even beyond the
winged word. One can imagine that one could put oneself into a word
and become a word, like Jesus, who became the Logos. He detached himself from God the Creator and took a flight into the world, shining like
a light. One could become such an impossible detached thing that one
no longer touches the earth. One would be as creative as a being with
golden wings in a globe or an egg—completely detached. I have really
seen such a representation. You remember, the vjñv cakra is the mandala with the two petals, which looks like the winged seed of certain
trees. It is quite purified from any earthly admixture; it has almost no
substance and is quite purely white light. So one gets the impression of
something that really has taken to wings. And I think that the idea of the
winged egg, or the homunculus in the second part of Faust, the artificial
little man that flies about in his retort, is really the anticipation of such
a possibility—a man who has created himself again in a new form, as the
old alchemist produced a little man in his retort. That, again, I take as a
symbol for the vjñv center.
Now this is, of course, an entirely empirical approach. In our Western
symbolism it sounds banal or grotesque, far from the absolute perfection
of the East, with its specific style, its specific beauty. We are at this stage in
the rough experience and the raw ordinary material; we are far from any
differentiation—we are only just beginning to see that we also have certain experiences that approach that kind of symbolism. We also know
something about color symbolism—for instance, that the different stages
are always symbolized by different colors. We know all those red things
108

HAUER'S ENGLISH LECTURE
belong to a region below the diaphragm where there is no air, and when
the red gets lighter it is a bit above the diaphragm, and when it disappears
and blue prevails, we are approaching the icy regions of detached consciousness. And we know that dark colors mean obscurity, or evil, or fear,
or heavy matter. And light colors always give the idea of differentiated
things, of things that are easy, sometimes even cheap, and detached. So
we have quite a series of colors with almost typical meanings.
All those other peculiarities of the Eastern cakras—the letters, the
sounds, the mantras, the differentiated gods—all that is, of course, lacking in our experience completely. But it is absolutely regular that every
mandala has a center, where there is something that one cannot grasp;
one tries, but it is most evasive. You see, man has forever felt something
which evades his grasp and is aloof; and which is not an ordinary thing,
it is always demoniacal. For instance, when a certain animal always eludes
him, when he never succeeds in catching it, the Red Indian says, “That
is no good animal; it is a doctor animal and ought never to be caught at
all.” A doctor animal is like a werewolf; it is divine or demoniacal. So in
our psychology the things we cannot grasp are usually the things to
which we give a sort of divine attribute. Therefore the center of a mandala, which is the object of drawing the whole mandala, is the very thing
that escapes, that cannot be tied down; one is forever deceived about it.
In the center is the invisible god.
Moreover, in each mandala one inevitably finds the male and the female elements clearly indicated, as here in the devz or åakti. And you
remember that Kundry, for instance, in the Parsifal legend is also represented with fangs, like åakti;25 in the lower localizations of our psychology there is a most terrible and bloodthirsty thing. Emotions on that
level are not mitigated by any kind of reason; there people have emotions and tear everything to bits because they themselves are torn into
shreds, the woman by the animus and the man by the anima. We must
allow for a new kind of cakra. In the case of a woman we should put in
the animus. The animus is also a thing with fangs. Here, too, we have
parallels, in that these figures are never in the center and will not be,
because they are things that are already known—they are the illusions,
or Mvyv, of gods. In the psychology of a Western mandala, the god is the
most excentric ego power, “my” power, just as the bindu-deva and the
åakti are usually on one side, away from the center. It is “my” power, but
it is moved by the invisible divine power in the center; in the center is the
great one, and the other is the smaller one. As Faust says, man is the
25 On the significance of the Parsifal legend for Jung, see John Haule, “Jung’s Amfortas
Wound,” Spring: A Journal of Archetype and Culture 53 (1992): 95–112.

109

APPENDIX 3
small god of the world. I am only the bindu, but the bzja letter, the real
thing, is the self, and whatever I do is moved or caused by the bzja-deva.
So one understands right away that part of the Eastern symbolism, despite the fact that in our mandalas it is never in such a form because we
don’t know what the gods are. We have not the faintest idea of God, we
have only a philosophical conception of the summum bonum as the Christian God in heaven, which we cannot imagine properly, and therefore
we cannot put it into our mandalas. Well, that is the main thing I wanted
to say. One could talk, of course, for a couple of centuries, but other
people must do that—I won’t live so long.
Professor Hauer: I have been most interested, it has been most enlightening—and I think that if we take just the psychic elements, these experiences may help us a long way toward the creating of new mandalas. I
would not agree, perhaps, with every explanation, but to a great extent
with the fact that there are first physiological centers, then psychic centers, and so on. I suppose it would be a great thing for the Indian yogins
to listen to Dr. Jung; it would help them to get those cakras into motion
again, they have made them into a metaphysical condensation and do
not see and feel so much, just the psychic aspect, and it is very important
to have that side. But then, of course, the development in India was
the other way, toward metaphysics. There were two causes, I think, for
the creation of the heart mandala. First, through certain experiences in
the heart; the great intuitions did not come through thinking, it is said
thousands of times in the Upanishads. They felt that the deepest intuition—which stands always for the creative power in India—was from the
heart. Then I am sure that physiologically the breathing had some
influence on the composition; and last, of course, they went on to the
metapsychical and metaphysical. And I think the study of the symbolism
of tantric yoga may help us to push forward in the direction of the metapsychical and metaphysical. For as I look at it, every center has a psychic
and a physical aspect, as well as the metaphysical and metapsychic aspects. That is indicated in the letters and so on, and also in the bzjas.
Further, the gods are psychic as well as metapsychic and metaphysical.
So I would say that if we work together from different sides, the yogin
coming from above, let us say—
Dr. Jung: And I from below!
Professor Hauer: Then the great event may happen, as with that girl,
your patient. When the two things come together, the child will be born.
So I hope something will come out of the work we have done here.

110

APPENDIX 4
û A † - C A K R A - N I R Ñ PA ö A

Preliminary verse
Now I speak of the first sprouting shoot (of the Yoga plant) of complete
realization of the Brahman, which is to be achieved, according to the Tantras, by means of the six Cakras and so forth in their proper order.
Verse 1
In the space outside the Meru, placed on the left and the right, are the
two Sirvs, åaçi and Mihira. The Nvìz Suüuṁnv, whose substance is the
threefold Gunas, is in the middle. She is the form of Moon, Sun, and
Fire; Her body, a string of blooming DhvtÖra flowers, extends to the
middle of the Kanda to the Head, and the Vajrv inside Her extends,
shining, from the Meìhra to the Head.
Verse 2
Inside her is Citriõz, who is lustrous with the lustre of the Praõava and
attainable in Yoga by Yogzs. She (Citriõz) is subtle as a spider’s thread,
and pierces all the Lotuses which are placed within the backbone, and is
pure intelligence. She (Citriõz) is beautiful by reason of these (Lotuses)
which are strung on her. Inside her (Citriõz) is the Brahmanvìz, which
extends from the orifice of the mouth of Hara to the place beyond,
where udi-deva is.
Verse 3
She is beautiful like a chain of lightening and fine like a (lotus) fibre,
and shines in the minds of sages. She is extremely subtle; the awakener
of pure knowledge; the embodiment of all Bliss, whose true nature is
pure Consciousness. The Brahma-dvvra shines in her mouth. This place
in the entrance to the region sprinkled by ambrosia, and is called the
Knot, as also the mouth of Suüuṁnv.
Verse 4
Next we come to the udhvra Lotus. It is attached to the mouth of the
111

APPENDIX 4
Suüuṁnv, and is placed below the genitals and above the anus. It has
four petals of crimson hue. Its head (mouth) hangs downwards. On its
petals are the four letters from Va to Sa, of the shining colour of gold.
Verse 5
In this (Lotus) is the square region (Cakra) of Pùthivz, surrounded by
eight shining spears. It is of a shining yellow colour and beautiful like
lightening, as is also the Bzja of Dharv which is within.
Verse 6
Ornamented with four arms and mounted on the King of Elephants,
He carries on his lap the child Creator, resplendent like the young Sun,
who has four lustrous arms, and the wealth of whose lotus-face is fourfold.
Verse 7
Here dwells the Devz Dakinz by name; her four arms shine with beauty,
and her eyes are brilliant red. She is resplendent like the lustre of many
Suns rising at one and the same time. She is the carrier of the revelation
of the ever-pure Intelligence.
Verse 8
Near the mouth of the Nvìz called Vajrv, and in the pericap (of the
udhvra Lotus), there constantly shines the beautifully luminous and
soft, lightening-like triangle which is KvmarÖpa, and known as Traipura.
There is always and everywhere the Vvyu called Kandarpa, who is of a
deeper red than the Bandhujzva flower, and is the Lord of Beings and
resplendent like ten million suns.
Verse 9
Inside it (the triangle) is Svayaṁbhu in His Li´ga-form, beautiful like
molten gold, with His head downwards. He is revealed by Knowledge and Meditation, and is of the shape and colour of a new leaf. As
the cool rays of lightening and of the full moon charm, so does His
beauty. The Deva who resides happily here as in Kvçz is in forms like a
whirlpool.
Verses 10 and 11
Over it shines the sleeping Kuõìalinz, fine as the fibre of the lotusstalk. She is the world-bewilderer, gently covering the mouth of Brahmadvvra by Her own. Like the spiral of the conch-shell, Her shining snakelike form goes three and a half times round åiva, and Her lustre is as that
of a strong flash of young strong lightening. Her sweet murmur is like
the indistinct hum of swarms of love-mad bees. She produces melodious
112

ûA†-C AKR A-NIRÑPAöA

poetry and Bandha and all other compositions in prose or verse in sequence or otherwise in Saṁskùta, Prvkùta and other languages. It is she
who maintains all beings of the world by means of inspiration and expiration, and shines in the cavity of the root (MÖla) Lotus like a chain of
brilliant lights.
Verse 12
Within it reigns dominant Parv, the årz-Parameçvarz, the Awakener of
eternal knowledge. She is the Omnipotent Kalv who is wonderfully skilful to create, and is subtler than the subtlest. She is the receptacle of that
continuous stream of ambrosia which flows from the Eternal Bliss. By
Her radiance it is that the whole of this Universe and this Cauldron is
illumined.
Verse 13
By meditating thus on Her who shines within the MÖla-Cakra, with the
lustre of ten million Suns, a man becomes Lord of speech and King
among men, and an Adept in all kinds of learning. He becomes ever free
from all diseases, and his inmost Spirit becomes full of great gladness.
Pure of disposition by his deep and musical words, he serves the foremost of the Devas.
Verse 14
There is another Lotus placed inside the Suüuṁnv at the root of the
genitals, of a beautiful vermilion colour. On its six petals are the letters
from Ba to Puraṁdara, with the Bindu superposed, of the shining colour
of lightening.
Verse 15
Within it is the white, shining, watery region of Varuõa, of the shape of
a half-moon, and therein, seated on a Makara, is the Bzja Vaṁ, stainless
and white as the autumnal moon.
Verse 16
May Hari, who is within it, who is in the pride of early youth, whose
body is of luminous blue beautiful to behold, who is dressed in yellow
raiment, is four armed and wears the årz-vatsa, and the Kausubha, protect us!
Verse 17
It is here that Rvkiõz always dwells. She is of the colour of a blue lotus.
The beauty of Her body is enhanced by Her uplifted arms holding various weapons. She is dressed in celestial raiment and ornaments, and Her
mind is exalted with the drinking of ambrosia.
113

APPENDIX 4
Verse 18
He who meditates upon this stainless Lotus, which is named
Svvdiü°hvna, is freed immediately from all his enemies, such as the fault
of Aha kvra and so forth. He becomes a Lord among Yogzs, and is like
the Sun illumining the dense darkness of ignorance. The wealth of his
nectar-like words flows in prose and verse in well-reasoned discourse.
Verse 19
Above it, at the root of the navel, is the shining Lotus of ten petals, of
the colour of heavy-laden rain-clouds. Within it are the letters ía to Pha,
of the colour of the blue lotus with the Nvda and Bindu above them.
Meditate there on the region of Fire, triangular in form and shining like
the rising sun. Outside it are three Svastika marks, and within, the Bzja of
Vahni himself.
Verse 20
Meditate upon him (Fire) seated on a ram, four-armed, radiant like
the rising Sun. In his lap ever dwells Rudra, who is of a pure vermilion
hue. He (Rudra) is white with the ashes with which he is smeared; of an
ancient aspect and three-eyed, His hands are placed in the attitude of
granting boons and dispelling fear. He is the destroyer of creation.
Verse 21
Here abides Lvkinz, the benefactress of all. She is four-armed, of radiant body, is dark (of complexion), clothed in yellow raiment and decked
with various ornaments, and exalted with the drinking of ambrosia. By
meditating on this Navel Lotus the power to destroy and create (the
world) is acquired. Vvõz with all the wealth of knowledge ever abides in
the lotus of His face.
Verse 22
Above that, in the heart, is the charming Lotus, of the shining colour
of the BandhÖka flower, with the twelve letters beginning with Ka, of the
colour of vermilion, placed therein. It is known by the name of Anvhata,
and is like the celestial wishing-tree, bestowing even more than (the supplicant’s) desire. The Region of Vvyu, beautiful and with six corners,
which is like unto the smoke in colour, is here.
Verse 23
Meditate within it on the sweet and excellent Pavana Bzja, grey as a
mass of smoke, with four arms, and seated on a black antelope. And
within it also (meditate) upon the Abode of Mercy, the Stainless Lord
who is lustrous like the Sun, and whose two hands make the gestures
which grant boons and dispels the fears of three worlds.
114

ûA†-C AKR A-NIRÑPAöA

Verse 24
Here dwells Kvkinz, who in colour is yellow like unto new lightening,
exhilarated and auspicious; three-eyed and the benefactress of all. She
wears all kinds of ornaments, and in Her four hands She carries the
noose and the skull, and makes the sign of blessing and the sign which
dispels fear. Her heart is softened with the drinking of nectar.
Verse 25
The åakti whose tender body is like ten million flashes of lightening is
in the pericarp of this Lotus in the form of a triangle (Trikoõa). Inside
the triangle is the çiva-Li´ga known by the name of Bvõa. This Li´ga is
like shining gold, and on his head is an orifice minute as that in a gem.
He is the resplendent abode of Lakümz.
Verse 26
He who meditates on this Heart Lotus becomes (like) the Lord of
Speech, and (like) yçvara he is able to protect and destroy the worlds.
This Lotus is like the celestial wishing-tree, the abode and seat of åarva.
It is beautified by the Haṁsa, which is like unto the steady tapering flame
of a lamp in a windless place. The filaments which surround and adorn
its pericarp, illumined by the solar region, charm.
Verse 27
Foremost among Yogzs, he is ever dearer than the dearest to women,
He is pre-eminently wise and full of noble deeds. His senses are completely under control. His mind in its intense concentration is engrossed
in thoughts of the Braham. His inspired speech flows like a stream of
(clear) water. He is like the Devata who is the beloved of Lakümz and is
able at will to enter another’s body.
Verses 28 and 29
In the throat is the Lotus called Viçuddha, which is pure and of a
smoky purple hue. All the (sixteen) shining vowels on its (sixteen) petals, of a crimson hue, are distinctly visible to him whose mind (Buddhi)
is illumined. In the pericarp of this lotus there is the Ethereal Region,
circular in shape, and white like the full Moon. On an elephant white as
snow is seated the Bzja of Aṁbhara, who is white of colour.
Of His four arms, two hold the noose and goad, and the other two
make the gestures of granting boons and dispelling fear. These add to
His beauty. In His lap there ever dwells the great snow-white Deva, threeeyed and five-faced, with ten beautiful arms, and clothed in a tiger’s skin.
His body is united with that of Girija, and He is known by what His name,
Sadv-åiva, signifies.
115

APPENDIX 4
Verse 30
Purer than the Ocean of Nectar is the åakti Svkinz who dwells in this
Lotus. Her raiment is yellow, and in Her four lotus-hands She carries the
bow, the arrow, the noose, and the goad. The whole region of the Moon
without the mark of the hare is in the pericarp of this Lotus. This (region) is the gateway of great Liberation for him who desires the wealth
of Yoga and whose senses are pure and controlled.
Verse 31
He who has attained complete knowledge of the utmv (Brahman) becomes by constantly concentrating his mind (Citta) on this Lotus a great
Sage, eloquent and wise, and enjoys uninterrupted peace of mind. He
sees the three periods, and becomes the benefactor of all, free from disease and sorrow and long-lived, and, like Haṁsa, the destroyer of endless
dangers.
Verse 31A
The Yogz, his mind constantly fixed on this Lotus, his breath controlled by Kuṁbhaka, is in his wrath able to move all the three worlds.
Neither Brahmv nor Viüõu, neither Hari-Hara nor SÖrya nor Gaõapa is
able to control his power (resist Him).
Verse 32
The Lotus named ujñv is like the moon (beautifully white). On its two
petals are the letters Ha and Küa, which are also white and enhance its
beauty. It shines with the glory of Dhyvna. Inside it is the åakti Hvkinz,
whose six faces are like so many moons. She has six arms, in one of which
She holds a book; two others are lifted up in the gestures of dispelling
fear and granting boons, and with the rest She holds a skull, a small
drum, and a rosary. Her mind is pure (åuddha-Cittv).
Verse 33
Within this Lotus dwells the subtle mind (Manas). It is well-known.
Inside the Yoni in the pericarp is the åiva called Itara, in His phallic
form. He here shines like a chain of lightning flashes. The first Bzja of
the Vedas, which is the abode of the most excellent åakti and which by
its lustre makes visible the Brahma-sÖtra, is also here. The Svdhaka
with steady mind should meditate upon these according to the order
(prescribed).
Verse 34
The excellent Sadhvka, whose utmv is nothing but a meditation on
this Lotus, is able quickly to enter another’s body at will, and becomes
116

ûA†-C AKR A-NIRÑPAöA

the most excellent among Munzs, and all-knowing and all-seeing. He becomes the benefactor of all, and versed in all the åvstras. He realises his
unity with the Brahman and acquires excellent and unknown powers.
Full of fame and long-lived, he ever becomes the Creator, Destroyer, and
Preserver, of the three worlds.
Verse 35
Within the triangle in this Cakra ever dwells the combination of letters
which form the Praõava. It is the inner utmv as pure mind (Buddhi),
and resembles a flame in its radiance. Above it is the half (crescent)
moon, and above this, again, is Ma-kvra, shining in its form of Bindu.
Above this is Nvda, whose whiteness equals that of Balarvma and diffuses
the rays of the Moon.
Verse 36
When the Yogz closes the house which hangs without support, the
knowledge whereof he has gained by the service of Parama-guru, and
when the Cetas by repeated practice become dissolved in this place
which is the abode of uninterrupted bliss, he then sees within the middle
of and in the space above (the triangle) sparks of fire distinctly shining.
Verse 37
He then also sees the Light which is in the form of a flaming lamp. It
is lustrous like the clearly shining morning sun, and glows between the
Sky and the Earth. It is here that the Bhagavvn manifests Himself in the
fullness of His might. He knows no decay, and witnesseth all, and is here
as He is in the region of Fire, Moon, and Sun.
Verse 38
This is the incomparable and delightful abode of Viüõu. The excellent
Yogz at the time of death joyfully places his vital breath (Prvõa) here and
enters (after death) that Supreme, Eternal, Birthless, Primeval Deva, the
Puruüa, who was before the three worlds, and who is known by the
Vedvnta.
Verse 39
When the actions of the Yogz are, through the service of the Lotus feet
of his Guru, in all respects good, then he will see above it (i.e., ujñvCakra) the form of Mahvnvda, and will ever hold in the Lotus of his
hand the Siddhi of Speech. The Mahvnvda, which is the place of dissolution of Vvyu is the half of åiva, and like the plough in shape, is tranquil
and grants boons and dispels fear, and makes manifest pure Intelligence
(Buddhi).
117

APPENDIX 4
Verse 40
Above all these, in the vacant space wherein is åaõkhinz Nvìz, and
below Visarga is the Lotus of a thousand petals. This Lotus, lustrous
and whiter than the full moon, has its head turned downward. It
charms. Its clustered filaments are tinged with the colour of the young
Sun. Its body is luminous with the letters beginning with A, and it is the
absolute bliss.
Verse 41
Within it (Sahasrvra) is the full Moon, without the mark of the hare,
resplendent as in a clear sky. It sheds its rays in profusion, and is moist
and cool like nectar. Inside it (Candra-maõìala), constantly shining like
lightening, is the Triangle and inside this, again, shines the Great Void
which is served by all the Suras.
Verse 42
Well concealed, and attainable only by great effort, is that subtle
Bindu (åÖnya) which is the chief root of liberation and which manifests
the pure Nirvvna-kalv with Anv-Kalv. Here is the Deva who is known to
all as Parama-åiva. He is the Brahman and the utmv of all beings. In Him
are united both Rasa and Virasa, and He is the Sun which destroys the
darkness of nescience and delusion.
Verse 43
By shedding a constant and profuse stream of nectar-like essence, the
Bhagavvn instructs the Yati of pure mind in the knowledge by which he
realizes the oneness of the Jzvvtmv and the Paramvtmv. He pervades all
things as their Lord, who is the ever-flowing and spreading current of all
manner of bliss known by the name of Haṁsah Parama (Paramahaṁsah).
Verse 44
The åaivas call it the abode of åiva; the Vaiüõavas call it Parama Puruüa;
others again, call it the place of Hari-Hara. Those who are filled with a
passion for the Lotus feet of the Devz call it the excellent abode of the
Devz; and other great sages (Munis) call it the pure place of PrakùtiPuruüa.
Verse 45
That most excellent of men who has controlled his mind and known
this place is never again born in the Wandering, as there is nothing in
the three worlds which binds him. His mind being controlled and his
118

ûA†-C AKR A-NIRÑPAöA

aim achieved, he possesses complete power to do all which he wishes,
and to prevent that which is contrary to his will. He ever moves towards
the Brahman. His speech, whether in prose or verse, is ever pure and
sweet.
Verse 46
Here is the excellent (supreme) sixteenth Kalv of the Moon. She is
pure, and resembles (in colour) the young Sun. She is as thin as the
hundredth part of a fibre in the stalk of lotus. She is lustrous and soft like
ten million lightening flashes, and is down-turned. From Her, whose
source is the Brahman, flows copiously the continuous stream of nectar
(or, She is the receptacle of the stream of excellent nectar which comes
from the blissful union of Para and Parv).
Verse 47
Inside it (Amv-Kalv) is Nirvvõa-kalv, more excellent than the excellent. She is as subtle as the thousandth part of the end of a hair, and of
the shape of the crescent moon. She is the ever-existent Bhagavatz, who
is the Devatv who pervades all beings. She grants divine knowledge,
and is as lustrous as the light of all the suns shining at one and the same
time.
Verse 48
Within its middle space (i.e., middle of the Nirvvõa-kalv) shines the
Supreme and Primordial Nirvvõa-åakti; She is lustrous like ten million
suns, and is the Mother of the three worlds. She is extremely subtle, and
like unto the ten-millionth part of the end of a hair. She contains within
her the constantly flowing stream of gladness, and is the life of all beings.
She graciously carries the knowledge of the Truth (Tattva) to the mind
of the sages.
Verse 49
Within her is the everlasting place called the abode of åiva, which is
free from Mvyv, attainable only by Yogzs, and known by the name of
Nityvnanda. It is replete with every form of bliss, and is pure knowledge itself. Some call it the Brahman; others call it the Haṁsa. Wise
men describe it as the abode of Viüõu, and righteous men speak of
it as the ineffable place of knowledge of the utmv, or the place of
Liberation.
Verse 50
He whose nature is purified by the practice of Yama, Niyama, and the
119

APPENDIX 4
like, learns from the mouth of his Guru the process which opens the way
to the discovery of the Great Liberation. He whose whole being is immersed in the Brahman then rouses the Devz by HÖṁ-kvra, pierces the
centre of the Li´ga, the mouth of which is closed, and is therefore invisible, and by means of the Air and Fire (within him) places her within the
Brahmadvvra.
Verse 51
The Devz who is åuddha-sattvv pierces the three Li´gas, and, having
reached all the lotuses which are known as the Brahma-nvìz lotuses,
shines therein in the fullness of Her lustre. Thereafter in Her subtle
state, lustrous like lightening and fine like the lotus fibre, She goes to the
gleaming flame-like åiva, the Supreme Bliss and of a sudden produces
the bliss of Liberation.
Verse 52
The wise and excellent Yogz rapt in ecstasy, and devoted to the Lotus
feet of his Guru, should lead Kula-Kuõìalz along with Jzva to Her Lord
the Para-çiva in the abode of Liberation within the pure Lotus and meditate upon Her who grants all desires as the Caitanya-rÖpv-Bhagavatz.
When he thus leads Kula-Kuõìalinz, he should make all things absorb
into Her.
Verse 53
The beautiful Kuõìalz drinks the excellent red nectar issuing from
Para-çiva, and returns from there where shines Eternal and Transcendent Bliss in all its glory along the path of Kula, and again enters the
Mulvdhvra. The Yogz who has gained steadiness of mind makes offering
(Tarpaõa) to the Iü°a-devatv and to the Devatvs in the six centres
(Cakra), Dvkinz and others, with that stream of celestial nectar which is
in the vessel of Brahmvõìa, the knowledge whereof he has gained
through the tradition of the Gunas.
Verse 54
The Yogz who has after practice of Yama, Niyama, and the like, learnt
this excellent method from the two Lotus Feet of the auspicious Diküvguru, which are the source of uninterrupted joy, and whose mind
(Manas) is controlled, is never born again in this world (Samsvra). For
him there is no dissolution even at the time of Final Dissolution. Gladdened by constant realization of that which is the source of Eternal Bliss,
he becomes full of peace and foremost among all Yogzs.
120

ûA†-C AKR A-NIRÑPAöA

Verse 55
If the Yogz who is devoted to the Lotus Feet of his Guru, with heart
unperturbed and concentrated mind, reads this work which is the supreme source of the knowledge of Liberation, and which is faultless,
pure, and most secret, then of a very surety his mind dances at the Feet
of his Iü°a-devatv.
TRANSLATED BY SIR JOHN WOODROFFE

121

INDEX

abdomen, as psychical localization, 34
Africa, 43, 95
Agni, 51, 77
air, symbolism of, 42, 44
vjñv: analogy of with mÖlvdhvra, 17–18;
center of, 75; consciousness in, 64, 66;
description of, 77–78, 116; gender symbols of, 103; and God, 57; and pure
thought, 63; representations of, 108;
sthÖla aspect of, 67; sÖküma aspect of, 68;
and suprapersonal values, 62
alchemy: analogy of with tantric yoga, 43;
Jung’s interpretation of, xlv; symbolism
of, 37
American Indian(s), 67, 81–82, 99, 109; archetype of, 81; Pueblo Indians, 30, 34,
106–7
Amitvyur-Dhyvna-SÖtra (Patanjali), xxvii
anvhata: center of, 75; color symbolism of,
102–3; consciousness in, 66; description
of, 77, 114; ego in, 40; emotions of, 63;
fire symbolism of, 44; gazelle as symbol
of, 52; gender symbols of, 103; and individuation, 39; and learning, 45; level of,
62; localization of, 34, 36; and mankind,
46; and the past, 59; and the puruüa, 39;
sthÖla aspect of, 67; symbolism of, 38;
and transition, 48–49, 54; and Western
thought, 65
analysis, process of, 50, 82–83
analytical psychology: analogy of to tantric
yoga, 95; evolution of, 96; and Kundalini
yoga, xlv
animals, 15, 60, 62, 67, 83, 109
animation, of images, 81
animus/anima: definition of, 98; explication
of, 37, 44; as the Kundalini, 22
Antonius, St., 80
archetypes, 10, 77; animation of, 81; in
childhood dreams, 73; thesis of, xlii; in
unconscious mind, 9
Artistic Form and Yoga in the Sacred Images of
India (Zimmer), 84
Athanius of Alexandria, 80

Attis, cult of, 17–18
Avalon, Arthur. See Woodroffe, Sir John
awareness, 82
baptism, symbolism of, 16–17, 30–32,
67
Baumann, Hans, 18, 38, 54, 97, 99
Baynes, C. F., 5, 11, 60n, 69
behaviorism, xxiv
belly-consciousness, 86
Bhakti yoga, xxii
Bharati, Agehananda, xxii
Bhattacharyya, Narenda Nath, xxiv–xxv
bliss, 73, 111
Boehme, Jakob, 58
brvhman, 6, 57, 65, 67, 75; as beginning, 66;
Eastern vs. Western concept of, 69
breath, symbolism of, 44. See also air, symbolism of
Brody, Daniel, xli
Buddha, 35, 73, 83, 95
Buddhism, 72. See also HinayanaBuddhism; Mahayana-Buddhism
cakras: animal symbolism of, 51–53; in children’s drawings, 73–74; color symbolism
of, 101–3; enumeration of, xxiv, 75–78;
and levels of consciousness, 74, 85; localizations of, 85; psyche symbolism of, 61,
67; psychical localizations of, 34; psychological interpretation of, xxiv–xxv; symbolism of, xxxix, xlv, 42, 58, 101–3; transitions between, 47–48
channels (nadis), xxiv–xxv, 75
Christ, 16, 18–19, 31, 40, 68, 86, 108; disciples of, 86
Christianity, xxxi, xli, xlv, 24, 67–68, 80, 84,
86; Catholicism, 31, 80; Greek Orthodox
Church, 11
citta, discussion of, 70n, 91–92
cognition, theory of, 55
collective unconscious, 9, 66; discovery of,
xliv; loss of contact with, 74; predetermination of, 73

123

INDEX
comparative psychology: cross-cultural,
xxix; parallels of with yoga, xix
consciousness: in vjñv, 64, 66; in anvhata,
66; broadening of through analysis, 82–
83; higher, xxiv; of impersonal experience, 97; and individuation process, 83;
levels of, 74, 85; predetermination of, 73;
pure, 111
Coward, Harold, xliii
Critique of Pure Reason (Kant), 10, 55
cycle of birth, death, and rebirth. See rebirth cycle
Dasgupta, Surendranath: on philosophy
of yoga, xxi–xxii; on yoga in Europe,
xxx
death, birth, and rebirth. See rebirth cycle
deification, through contemplation, 72
depth psychology: comparison of to yoga,
xlii; emergence of, xviii–xix
Devi-Kundalini, 74
Dhyanabindu Upanishads, 75
diaphragm-consciousness, 86, 107
dreams, 49, 64, 83n, 98, 102
earth, as symbol of mÖlvdhvra, 42
East, the, xvii–iii, xx, xxx, xxxiii, xliv, 8–9,
15–16, 19, 34, 61, 65, 88, 92–94, 108
Eastern thought: dogma of, 94–95; and
Western thought, xviii–xxi, xxviin, 19,
104–6
ego, 4–5, 7, 14, 29, 39, 57, 61, 66, 83, 87
Egypt, 31, 38, 74n
Egyptian symbolism, 74n
Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule,
xxvii
elephant, symbolism of, 51, 54–57, 76, 103
Eliade, Mircea: on tantrism, xxii; on yoga,
xxi, xxx
emotions, interdependence of with facts,
49
energy, 4, 8, 23, 34, 55, 59, 72; emotional
energy, 35
entelechia: fulfillment of, 29; in growth, 4
epistemology, reign of, xxiv
eroticism, in tantric texts, xliii
eternity, ancient symbolism of, 31
ether, as symbol of viçuddha, 42
euphemisms, as apotropaic theory, 33
Evans-Wentz, Walter, xx

Feuerstein, Georg: on cakras, xxiv, xxv; definition of yoga, xxii; on Hauer, xxxii–
xxxiii
fire, as symbol of manipÖra, 42
“five forbidden things,” in tantrism, xxiii
Freud, Sigmund, 33, 53; sexual theory, 11
Gandhi, Mohandas Karamcham: creation
of symbols by, 96; salt march of, xvii
gazelle, symbolism of, 52, 53–54, 103
gender symbolism, of cakras, xxiv, 103
German Faith Movement, xli
Germanic Vision of God (Hauer), xli
Gestalt theory, 61
God, concepts of, 56–57
Goethe, Faust, 78, 108–9
Great Britain, government of, in India, xvii
grotto symbolism, 18
Haggard, Rider, She, 21
Hangsa Upanishads, 75
Hannah, Barbara, xxxiii, 14, 32, 38, 92, 95
Hatha yoga: classification of, xxii; comparison of to Kundalini yoga, xxxix
Hauer, Wilhelm: break with Jung, xli–xlii;
on cakras, 11, 13, 17n; collaboration with
Jung, xx; criticism of Jung, xlii–xliii;
definition of yoga, xxxviii; education of,
xxxi–xxxii; Germanic Vision of God, xli;
“Die indo-arische Lehre vom Selbste im
Vergleich mit Kants Lehre vom intelligiblen Subject,” xli; introduction to Kundalini, xxv–xxvi; on Kundalini, 20, 88;
“Der Quellgrund des Glaubens und die
religiöse Gestaltwerdung,” xli; on the
swastika, 43; on yoga, xvii; Der Yoga: Ein
Indischer Weg zum Selbst, xlii; “Der Yoga im
Lichte der Psychotherapie,” xxxii
head-consciousness, in Western thought,
86, 106
heart: as locality of mind, 106; as seat of
soul, 74
Heraclitus, 34
Hinayana-Buddhism, 72
Hindu philosophy: aboriginal influences
on, 95; and Buddhism, 72; compared to
tantrism, xxii; orientation of, 16; origins
of, 43
hypostasis: clarification of, 11; vs. hypotheses, 10

124

INDEX
iìv nvìzs: description of, 75; importance of,
xxiv
Ignatius of Loyola, 80
images: animation of, 81; inner, 71
impersonal experience: beginning of, 29;
consciousness of, 97; discussion of, 26–
27, 93–94
India, independence of, xvii
individuation process: beginning in
anvhata, 39; vs. individuality, 5; instinct
of, 4; Jung’s insight into, xliii; parallel of
Kundalini yoga to, xxxiii; as severing of
consciousness, 83; and symbolism of
cakras, xlv; yoga’s symbolic depictions of,
xxix
initiation rites, and pain, 35, 45
International Psychoanalytical Association,
xix
Jnana yoga, xxii
Jung, C. G.: on alchemy and Christianity,
xlv; break with Hauer, xli–xlii; commentary on Hauer’s lectures, xxxiii–xxxiv;
“Commentary on ‘The Secret of the
Golden Flower,’” xviiin, xx, xlv, xlvin,
30n, 97n, 98n; “The Dreamlike World of
India,” xxviii; on Indian religion, xxvii;
Memories, Dreams, Reflections, xxv; psychological definition of yoga, xxix; “The Psychology of Eastern Meditation,” xxvii;
“Richard Wilhelm: In Memoriam,” xviii;
search for parallels, 71–72; on symbolism
of Kundalini yoga, xxvi–xxvii; on tantric
yoga, xxiii; Transformation and Symbols of
the Libido, xix; “What India Can Teach
Us,” xxviii; “Wotan,” xli; “Yoga and the
West,” xxvii; on yoga in Europe, xxx
Kali, xxviii
kalpataru tree, as symbol of anvhata, 77
Kant, Immanuel, 55
Karma yoga, xxii
Keyserling, Hermann: The Travel Diary of a
Philosopher, xix; on yoga in Europe, xxxi
kleças: discussion of, 4–7; Hauer’s definition
of, 4n
Krishna, Gopi, xixn, xlv
Kundalini: analogy of to sun serpent, 86;
awakening of, xxvi, xlivn, 25–26, 68,
76; explanation of, xxv; Hauer’s defini-

tion of, 20n; journey of, 120; sleeping,
112; spontaneous appearance of, 85;
symbolism of, xv, 104–6; time of awakening of, 88–89; Western analogies with,
21–22
Kundalini serpent: movement of, xl; symbolism of, 74
Kundalini yoga: and analytical psychology,
xlv; classification of, xxii; divergent interpretations of, xlvi; Hauer’s definition of,
xxxix; Jung’s understanding of, xviii, xl;
mysticism of, 28; symbolism of, 74, 94
Laing, R. D., xxvii
Layard, John, xxixn
Laya yoga, xxii
leviathan, as symbol of svvdiü°hvna, 17, 21,
51, 58, 76
libido, 4, 9, 23, 51
li´ga, 18, 29, 39, 57, 72–73, 76–77, 107
Mahayana-Buddhism: development of, 72;
teachings of, 73
mana center, 75
mandalas, 76n, 79, 97; in children’s drawings, 73–74; creation of, 97, 99–100; significance of term, 12; as symbolism of
tantric yoga, 3
manipÖra: center of, 75; color symbolism of,
102; description of, 76–77; emotions of,
63; fire symbolism of, 35, 45, 66; level of,
62; localization of, 36; psychological aspect of, 32, 38; ram as symbol of, 51; symbolism of, 30–31; transition from, 48–49,
54; wind symbolism of, 37
mantras: of vjñv, 77; role of in svdhana, 72
Mantra yoga, xxii
Maya: as consciousness, 73; veil of, 74
McCormick, Fowler, xxviii
meditation: in Hinduism, 72; parallels of
with psychological analysis, 79–82
Meier, C. A., xxvin, xxxii–xxxiii, xxxiv,
xxxix, xlivn, 10, 36, 46n
Memories, Dreams, Reflections ( Jung), xxv
metaphysics: and cakras, 75; Hauer’s definition of, 69n
mind, locality of, 106–7
Mithraic ritual, and sun mythology, 37n
mÖlvdhvra: analogy of with vjñv, 17–18; and
baptism symbolism, 30; as base during

125

INDEX
mÖlvdhvra (cont.)
life, 58, 60, 67; center of, 75; color symbolism of, 17, 102; description of, 76; discussion of, 15; and dormancy of psychic
life, 64–65; ego in, 40; gender symbols
of, 103; Jung’s conception of, 13; localization of, 62; orientation of, 19; point of
view of, 26–29; psychic situation in, 66;
sthÖla aspect of, 68; symbolism of, 23;
transitory nature of, 24–25; translation
of, 14; and unconsciousness, 106; water
symbolism of, 16–17; Western language
concepts of, 70

psychic objectivity, 93
psychic world, 94
psychoanalysis: dominance of, xxiv; purification of mind in, 91
psychogenic factor, 53
psychology, parallels of with yoga, xviii–xxi,
xxix. See also analytical psychology; comparative psychology; depth psychology
psychotherapy, parallels of with yoga, xxxii
puruüa: awareness of, 45–47, 54; definition
of, 38n; Eastern vs. Western concept of,
69; translation of, 39n
Pyschoanalyse und Yoga (Schmitz), xx

nvìzs (channels), xxiv–xxv, 75
National Socialism, xli, xlii
Needleman, Jacob, xxiii
Nehru, Motilal, xvii
new age movement, xviii, xxiii
newspapers, influence of, 46
Nietzsche, Friederich, 73
nirvvna, 57

Quetzalcoatl, image of, 82

objectification, 92
ontology, xlv
padma-lotus: definition of, 15; description
of, 73
Pvdukv-pañcaka, xxvi
pain, in initiation rites, 35, 45
parv aspect: Hindu viewpoint of, 65; and
metaphysics, 69; philosophy of, 60
parallels, Jung’s search for, 71–72
participation mystique: and hatred, 5; and
individuality, 7; and mÖlvdhvra, 15
Patanjali: Amitvyur-Dhyvna-SÖtra, xxvii; Shrichakrasambhara, xxvii; Yoga Sutras, xix,
xxvii
Persian symbolism, 74n
piõgalv nvìzs: description of, 75; importance of, xxiv
Plato, 9–10, 55, 61
plumed serpent, 82
primitives, 35, 37, 40, 60, 62, 85; primitive
mind, 10
psyche: primordial structure of, 72; topography of, xlv
psychic adaptation, 96

Raja yoga, xxii
ram, as symbol of manipÖra, 51, 77
Ramakrishna movement, xxix
realization, 4
rebirth, death, and birth. See rebirth cycle
rebirth cycle: in Indian philosophy, xxi; in
tantrism, xxiii; and water symbolism, 16
Reichstein, Tadeus, xxxix–xl
reincarnation, xxi, 9
religions: gender casts of, xxii–xxiii;
Hauer’s vision of, xli
religious exercises, as meditation, 80
Rig Veda, xix
role-playing, 93
Rolland, Romain, xxix
svdhana, 72
sahasrvra: Hindu viewpoint of, 65; as plane
of transcendence, 47n; symbolism of, 57
åakti: as emanation of power, 73; union of
with åiva, xxv
åakti-Kundalini, as goddess, 74
Samkhya philosophy: as origin of Hindu
philosophy, 43; relationship of to yoga,
xxi
saôskvras: as archetypes, 69; discussion of,
9; in dreams, 73; Hauer’s definition of, 8
sandhsv-bhvüv, xliii
ûa°-cakra-nirÖpaõa: depiction of experience,
xlvi; Hauer’s understanding of, xxvi; text
of, 111–20
schizophrenia, 27

126

INDEX
Schmitz, Oskar, xx
School of Wisdom, xix
sea monster (makara), 13, 18, 92, 93n
The Secret of the Golden Flower, xx, xlv, 12, 14,
77–78
self, 14–15, 29, 39, 49, 57, 61, 85, 87
The Serpent Power (Woodroffe), xxvi, 106
serpents: feathered, 82; symbolism of in
analysis, 84–85. See also Kundalini serpent
sexual revolution, and tantrism, xxiii
sexual symbolism, in tantric texts, xliii
Shivaism: description of, 73; tantric basis of,
72
Shrichakrasambhara (Patanjali), xxvii, 12
åiva, 15, 18, 39, 57, 74, 87, 89, 93n
Solar Phallus Man, 37
soma cakra, 75
Soter (Saviour Serpent of the Gnostics), 68–
69
sound, in meditation, 101
Spiegelberg, Friederich, xl
spirit, 37
spiritual development, 71
sthÖla aspect: definition of, 6n; discussion
of, 7–9, 66; of higher cakras, 64; as
personal aspect, 62–63, 65; philosophy
of, 60; Western language concepts of,
70
subconscious; in Kundalini yoga, xxxix;
sound force in, 101
sÖküma aspect: conscious understanding of,
64; definition of, 6n; discussion of, 7–10;
Hindu acceptance of, 65–66; philosophy
of, 60; as suprapersonal aspect, 62, 69;
Western language concepts of, 70
sun serpent, 86
suprapersonal process: in analysis, 66–67;
creation of values, 65; discussion of values, 62; and sÖküma aspect, 62, 69
suüumõv nvìzs: ascent of Kundalini
through, xxv; importance of, xxiv
Suzuki, Daisetz: collaboration with Jung,
xx; Ten Essays in Buddhism, 89–90
svvdiü°hvna: baptism symbolism of, 66–67;
as beginning of psychic life, 63–64; center of, 75; color symbolism of, 17; description of, 76, 113–14; discussion of,

15; Hauer’s description of, 13n; level of,
62; leviathan as symbol of, 51; and sthÖla
aspect, 69; water symbolism of, 17
swastika: Hauer’s symbolism of, xli; Jung’s
discussion of, 43
symbolism: of alchemy, 37; in analysis, 83;
of animals, 51–56, 74, 76–77, 84–85; of
baptism, 16–17, 30–32, 66–67; of breath,
44; of color, 17, 101–3, 108–9; of elements, 16–17, 35, 37, 42, 44–45, 66; of
gender, xxiv, 103; of mandalas, 3; of
plants, 77, 83; of psyche, 61, 67
symbols, definition of, 61
taboos, in tantrism, xxiii
tantric texts, language of, xliii
tantric yoga: chthonic nature of, 95; vs. classical yoga, 91; evolution of, 96; obscurity
of, 12; origins of, 43; repute of, xxviiin
tantrism: as countercurrent to Christianity,
xlv; and Kundalini yoga, xxii–xxv; origins
of, 72; overview of, xxii–xxiii; taboos of,
xxiii
tattva: discussion of, 9, 11; libido as example of, 8
Ten Essays in Buddhism (Suzuki), 89–90
Theosophy, 68
totem rites, and impersonal experience, 93
transformation, of images, 82
Transformation and Symbols of the Libido
( Jung), xix
The Travel Diary of a Philosopher (Keyserling),
xix
trees, symbolism of, 83
unconscious, 13, 17–21, 27–28, 32–33,
35–36, 59, 62, 66–70, 79, 85, 104; activation of, 68; and archetypes, 9; difficulties of experiencing, 27; localization
of, 85; in religious instruction, 80; spirit
of, 82; stillborn in Catholics, 80; unleashing of, 33, 35–36. See also collective
unconscious
underground symbolism, 18
unfathomable things, 109
unicorn, symbolism of, 52
Upanishads, xix. See also Dhyanabindu
Upanishads; Hangsa Upanishads

127

INDEX
vajra, 72
Vedanta, xxi, 65
Vishnu, 75
viçuddha: attainment of, 46–47; center of,
75; description of, 77, 115; elephant as
symbol of, 54–56; and subjective experience, 50; and suprapersonal values, 62;
symbolism of, 42–43; transition to, 48–
49; and verbalization, 63
Vivekânanda, Swami, xxxi

Woodroffe, Sir John, 71n, 88, 95; The Serpent Power, 3n, 22n, 74n, 76n, 106; translation of Shrichakrasambhara, 12
Wotan, xli, 58

water, symbolism of, 42. See also baptism,
symbolism of
water monster, as symbol of svvdiü°hvna, 51,
76
Der Weg zum Selbst (Zimmer), xxvii
Western thought, and Eastern thought,
xviii–xxi, xxviin, 19, 104–6
Wilhelm, Richard, xvii–xviii, xxxii
wind: relationship of to spirit, 37; symbolic
meaning of, 44; as symbol of mind, 44.
See also air, symbolism of
Winter, F. I., xix
Wolff, Toni, xxxviii, 6, 60n

yantra, 12, 72
yoga: definitions of, xxi–xxii; Jung’s psychological definition of, xxix; parallels of with
psychology, xviii–xxi, xxix; parallels of
with psychotherapy, xxxii; schools of, xxii;
symbolism of, xxix; in Western cultures,
xlii. See also Kundalini yoga; tantric yoga
Der Yoga: Ein Indischer Weg zum Selbst
(Hauer), xlii
Yoga SÖtras (Patanjali), xix, xxvii
“The Yoga System and Psychoanalysis”
(Winter), xix
yoni, 15, 18n, 72–73, 77, 103, 107
Zimmer, Heinrich: Artistic Form and Yoga in
the Sacred Images of India, 84; collaboration with Jung, xx; on Hauer, xxxii–
xxxiii; Der Weg zum Selbst, xxvii
zodiac serpent, 86

128

The Collected Works of C. G. Jung
Editors: Sir Herbert Read, Michael Fordham, and Gerhard Adler; executive editor,
William McGuire. Translated by R.F.C. Hull, except where noted.

1. PSYCHIATRIC STUDIES (1957; 2d ed., 1970)
On the Psychology and Pathology of So-Called Occult
Phenomena (1902)
On Hysterical Misreading (1904)
Cryptomnesia (1905)
On Manic Mood Disorder (1903)
A Case of Hysterical Stupor in a Prisoner in Detention (1902)
On Simulated Insanity (1903)
A Medical Opinion on a Case of Simulated Insanity (1904)
A Third and Final Opinion on Two Contradictory Psychiatric
Diagnoses (1906)
On the Psychological Diagnosis of Facts (1905)
2. EXPERIMENTAL RESEARCHES (1973)
Translated by Leopold Stein in collaboration with Diana Riviere
STUDIES IN WORD ASSOCIATION (1904–7, 1910)
The Associations of Normal Subjects (by Jung and F. Riklin)
An Analysis of the Associations of an Epileptic
The Reaction-Time Ratio in the Association Experiment
Experimental Observations on the Faculty of Memory
Psychoanalysis and Association Experiments
The Psychological Diagnosis of Evidence
Association, Dream, and Hysterical Symptom
The Psychopathological Significance of the Association Experiment
Disturbances in Reproduction in the Association Experiment
The Association Method
The Family Constellation
PSYCHOPHYSICAL RESEARCHES (1907–8)
On the Psychophysical Relations of the Association Experiment
Psychophysical Investigations with the Galvanometer and Pneumograph
in Normal and Insane Individuals (by F. Peterson and Jung)
(continued)

Further Investigations on the Galvanic Phenomenon and Respiration in
Normal and Insane Individuals (by C. Ricksher and Jung)
Appendix: Statistical Details of Enlistment (1906); New Aspects of Criminal Psychology (1908); The Psychological Methods of Investigation
Used in the Psychiatric Clinic of the University of Zurich (1910); On
the Doctrine Complexes ([1911] 1913); On the Psychological Diagnosis of Evidence (1937)
3. THE PSYCHOGENESIS OF MENTAL DISEASE (1960)
The Psychology of Dementia Praecox (1907)
The Content of the Psychoses (1908/1914)
On Psychological Understanding (1914)
A Criticism of Bleuler’s Theory of Schizophrenic Negativism (1911)
On the Importance of the Unconscious in Psychology (1914)
On the Problem of Psychogenesis in Mental Disease (1919)
Mental Disease and the Psyche (1928)
On the Psychogenesis of Schizophrenia (1939)
Recent Thoughts on Schizophrenia (1957)
Schizophrenia (1958)
4. FREUD AND PSYCHOANALYSIS (1967)
Freud’s Theory of Hysteria: A Reply to Aschaffenburg (1906)
The Freudian Theory of Hysteria (1908)
The Analysis of Dreams (1909)
A Contribution to the Psychology of Rumour (1910–11)
On the Significance of Number Dreams (1910–11)
Morton Prince, “The Mechanism and Interpretation of Dreams”:
A Critical Review (1911)
On the Criticism of Psychoanalysis (1910)
Concerning Psychoanalysis (1912)
The Theory of Psychoanalysis (1913)
General Aspects of Psychoanalysis (1913)
Psychoanalysis and Neurosis (1916)
Some Crucial Points in Psychoanalysis: A Correspondence between
Dr. Jung and Dr. Loÿ (1914)
Prefaces to “Collected Papers on Analytical Psychology”
(1916, 1917)
The Significance of the Father in the Destiny of the Individual
(1909/1949)
Introduction to Kranefeldt’s “Secret Ways of the Mind” (1930)
Freud and Jung: Contrasts (1929)

5. SYMBOLS OF TRANSFORMATION ([1911–12/1952] 1956;
2d ed., 1967)
PART I
Introduction
Two Kinds of Thinking
The Miller Fantasies: Anamnesis
The Hymn of Creation
The Song of the Moth
PART II
Introduction
The Concept of Libido
The Transformation of Libido
The Origin of the Hero
Symbols of the Mother and Rebirth
The Battle for Deliverance from the Mother
The Dual Mother
The Sacrifice
Epilogue
Appendix: The Miller Fantasies
6. PSYCHOLOGICAL TYPES ([1921] 1971)
A revision by R.F.C. Hull of the translation by H. G. Baynes
Introduction
The Problem of Types in the History of Classical and Medieval
Thought
Schiller’s Idea on the Type Problem
The Apollonian and the Dionysian
The Type Problem in Human Character
The Type Problem in Poetry
The Type Problem in Psychopathology
The Type Problem in Aesthetics
The Type Problem in Modern Philosophy
The Type Problem in Biography
General Description of the Types
Definitions
Epilogue
Four Papers on the Psychological Typology (1913, 1925, 1931, 1936)
7. TWO ESSAYS ON ANALYTICAL PSYCHOLOGY (1953; 2d ed., 1966)
On the Psychology of the Unconscious (1917/1926/1943)
The Relations between the Ego and the Unconscious (1928)
(continued)

Appendix: New Paths in Psychology (1912); The Structure of the
Unconscious (1916) (new versions, with variants, 1966)
8. THE STRUCTURE AND DYNAMICS OF THE PSYCHE (1960;
2d ed., 1969)
On Psychic Energy (1928)
The Transcendent Function ([1916] 1957)
A Review of the Complex Theory (1934)
The Significance of Constitution and Heredity in Psychology
(1929)
Psychological Factors Determining Human Behavior (1937)
Instinct and the Unconscious (1919)
The Structure of the Psyche (1927/1931)
On the Nature of the Psyche (1947/1954)
General Aspects of Dream Psychology (1916/1948)
On the Nature of Dreams (1945/1948)
The Psychological Foundations of Belief in Spirits
(1920/1948)
Spirit and Life (1926)
Basic Postulates of Analytical Psychology (1931)
Analytical Psychology and Weltanschauung (1928/1931)
The Real and the Surreal (1933)
The Stages of Life (1930–31)
The Soul and Death (1934)
Synchronicity: An Acausal Connecting Principle (1952)
Appendix: On Synchronicity (1951)
9. PART I. THE ARCHETYPES AND THE COLLECTIVE UNCONSCIOUS
(1959; 2d ed., 1968)
Archetypes of the Collective Unconscious (1934/1954)
The Concept of the Collective Unconscious (1936)
Concerning the Archetypes, with Special Reference to the Anima
Concept (1936/1954)
Psychological Aspects of the Mother Archetype (1938/1954)
Concerning Rebirth (1940/1950)
The Psychology of the Child Archetype (1940)
The Psychological Aspects of the Kore (1941)
The Phenomenology of the Spirit in Fairytales (1945/1948)
On the Psychology of the Trickster-Figure (1954)
Conscious, Unconscious, and Individuation (1939)
A Study in the Process of Individuation (1934/1950)

Concerning Mandala Symbolism (1950)
Appendix: Mandalas (1955)
9. PART II. AION ([1951] 1959; 2d ed., 1968)
RESEARCHES INTO THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE SELF
The Ego
The Shadow
The Syzygy: Anima and Animus
The Self
Christ, a Symbol of the Self
The Sign of the Fishes
The Prophecies of Nostradamus
The Historical Significance of the Fish
The Ambivalence of the Fish Symbol
The Fish in Alchemy
The Alchemical Interpretation of the Fish
Background to the Psychology of Christian Alchemical
Symbolism
Gnostic Symbols of the Self
The Structure and Dymanics of the Self
Conclusion
10. CIVILIZATION IN TRANSITION (1964; 2d ed., 1970)
The Role of the Unconscious (1918)
Mind and Earth (1927/1931)
Archaic Man (1931)
The Spiritual Problem of Modern Man (1928/1931)
The Love Problem of a Student (1928)
Woman in Europe (1927)
The Meaning of Psychology for Modern Man (1933/1934)
The State of Psychotherapy Today (1934)
Preface and Epilogue to “Essays on Contemporary Events”
(1946)
Wotan (1936)
After the Catastrophe (1945)
The Fight with the Shadow (1946)
The Undiscovered Self (Present and Future) (1957)
Flying Saucers: A Modern Myth (1958)
A Psychological View of Conscience (1958)
Good and Evil in Analytical Psychology (1959)
Introduction to Wolff’s “Studies in Jungian Psychology”(1959)
(continued)

The Swiss Line in the European Spectrum (1928)
Reviews of Keyserling’s “America Set Free” (1930) and “La Révolution
Mondiale” (1934)
The Complications of American Psychology (1930)
The Dreamlike World of India (1939)
What India Can Teach Us (1939)
Appendix: Documents (1933–38)
11. PSYCHOLOGY AND RELIGION: WEST AND EAST (1958;
2d ed., 1969)
WESTERN RELIGION
Psychology and Religion (the Terry Lectures) (1938/1940)
A Psychological Approach to Dogma of the Trinity (1942/1948)
Transformation Symbolism in the Mass (1942/1954)
Forewords to White’s “God and the Unconscious” and Werblowsky’s
“Lucifer and Prometheus” (1952)
Brother Klaus (1933)
Psychotherapists or the Clergy (1932)
Psychoanalysis and the Cure of Souls (1928)
Answer to Job (1952)
EASTERN RELIGION
Psychological Commentaries on “The Tibetan Book of Great Liberation” (1939/1954) and “The Tibetan Book of the Dead”
(1935/1953)
Yoga and the West (1936)
Foreword to Suzuki’s “Introduction to Zen Buddhism” (1939)
The Psychology of Eastern Meditation (1943)
The Holy Men of India: Introduction to Zimmer’s “Der Weg zum
Selbst”(1944)
Foreword to the “I Ching” (1950)
12. PSYCHOLOGY AND ALCHEMY ([1944] 1953; 2d ed., 1968)
Prefatory Note to the English Edition ([1951?] added 1967)
Introduction to the Religious and Psychological Problems of
Alchemy
Individual Dream Symbolism in Relation to Alchemy (1936)
Religious Ideas in Alchemy (1937)
Epilogue
13. ALCHEMICAL STUDIES (1968)
Commentary on “The Secret of the Golden Flower” (1929)
The Visions of Zosimos (1938/1954)

Paracelsus as a Spiritual Phenomenon (1942)
The Spirit Mercurius (1943/1948)
The Philosophical Tree (1945/1954)
14. MYSTERIUM CONIUNCTIONIS ([1955–56] 1963; 2d ed., 1970)
AN INQUIRY INTO THE SEPARATION AND
SYNTHESIS OF PSYCHIC OPPOSITES IN ALCHEMY
The Components of the Coniunctio
The Paradoxa
The Personification of the Opposites
Rex and Regina
Adam and Eve
The Conjunction
15. THE SPIRIT IN MAN, ART, AND LITERATURE (1966)
Paracelsus (1929)
Paracelsus the Physician (1941)
Sigmund Freud in His Historical Setting (1932)
In Memory of Sigmund Freud (1939)
Richard Wilhelm: In Memoriam (1930)
On the Relation of Analytical Psychology to Poetry (1922)
Psychology and Literature (1930/1950)
“Ulysses”: A Monologue (1932)
Picasso (1932)
16. THE PRACTICE OF PSYCHOTHERAPY (1954; 2d ed., 1966)
GENERAL PROBLEMS OF PSYCHOTHERAPY
Principles of Practical Psychotherapy (1935)
What Is Psychotherapy? (1935)
Some Aspects of Modern Psychotherapy (1930)
The Aims of Psychotherapy (1931)
Problems of Modern Psychotherapy (1929)
Psychotherapy and a Philosophy of Life (1943)
Medicine and Psychotherapy (1945)
Psychotherapy Today (1945)
Fundamental Questions of Psychotherapy (1951)
SPECIFIC PROBLEMS OF PSYCHOTHERAPY
The Therapeutic Value of Abreaction (1921/1928)
The Practical Use of Dream-Analysis (1934)
The Psychology of the Transference (1946)
Appendix: The Realities of Practical Psychotherapy
([1937] added 1966)
(continued)

17. THE DEVELOPMENT OF PERSONALITY (1954)
Psychic Conflicts in a Child (1910/1946)
Introduction to Wickes’s “Analyses der Kinderseele” (1927/1931)
Child Development and Education (1928)
Analytical Psychology and Education: Three Lectures (1926/1946)
The Gifted Child (1943)
The Significance of the Unconscious in Individual Education
(1928)
The Development of Personality (1934)
Marriage as a Psychological Relationship (1925)
18. THE SYMBOLIC LIFE (1954)
Translated by R.F.C. Hull and others
Miscellaneous Writings
19. COMPLETE BIBLIOGRAPHY OF C. G. JUNG’S WRITINGS
(1976; 2d ed., 1992)
20. GENERAL INDEX OF THE COLLECTED WORKS (1979)
THE ZOFINGIA LECTURES (1983)
Supplementary Volume A to the Collected Works.
Edited by William McGuire, translated by
Jan van Heurck, introduction by
Marie-Louise von Franz
PSYCHOLOGY OF THE UNCONSCIOUS ([1912] 1992)
A STUDY OF THE TRANSFORMATIONS AND SYMBOLISMS OF THE
LIBIDO.
A CONTRIBUTION TO THE HISTORY OF THE EVOLUTION OF THOUGHT
Supplementary Volume B to the Collected Works.
Translated by Beatrice M. Hinkle,
introduction by William McGuire
Related Publications
THE BASIC WRITINGS OF C. G. JUNG
Selected and introduced by Violet S. de Laszlo
PSYCHE AND SYMBOL
Selected and introduced by Violet S. de Laszlo

C. G. JUNG: LETTERS
Selected and edited by Gerhard Adler, in collaboration with Aniela Jaffé.
Translations from the German by R.F.C. Hull
VOL. 1: 1906–1950
VOL. 2: 1951–1961
THE FREUD / JUNG LETTERS
Edited by William McGuire, translated by
Ralph Manheim and R.F.C. Hull
C. G. JUNG SPEAKING: Interviews and Encounters
Edited by William McGuire and R.F.C. Hull
C. G. JUNG: Word and Image
Edited by Aniela Jaffé
THE ESSENTIAL JUNG
Selected and introduced by Anthony Storr
THE GNOSTIC JUNG
Selected and introduced by Robert A. Segal
Notes to C. G. Jung’s Seminars
DREAM ANALYSIS ([1928–30] 1984)
Edited by William McGuire
NIETZSCHE’S ZARATHUSTRA ([1934–39] 1988)
Edited by James L. Jarrett (2 vols.)
ANALYTICAL PSYCHOLOGY ([1925] 1989)
Edited by William McGuire
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF KUNDALINI YOGA ([1932] 1996)
Edited by Sonu Shamdasani
INTERPRETATION OF VISIONS ([1930–34] 1997)
Edited by Claire Douglas

