Serpent Rising: The Kundalini Compendium
Copyright © 2022 By Neven Paar. All Rights Reserved.
No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or mechanical means
including information storage and retrieval systems, without permission in writing from the author.
The only exception is by a reviewer, who may quote short excerpts in a review.
Cover design by Neven and Emily Paar
Illustrations by Neven Paar
A Winged Shoes Publishing Production
Disclaimer: All material found in this work is provided for your information only and may not
be construed as professional medical advice or instruction. No action or inaction should be taken
based solely on the contents of this information; instead, readers should consult appropriate health
professionals on any matter relating to their health and well-being. Although the author and publisher
have made every effort to ensure that the information in this book was correct at press time, the
author and publisher do not assume and hereby disclaim any liability to any party for any loss,
damage, or disruption caused by errors or omissions, whether such errors or omissions result from
negligence, accident, or any other cause.

Other books by Neven Paar
The Magus: Kundalini and the Golden Dawn
www.nevenpaar.com

I dedicate this work to the Kundalini Initiate. May this book guide
you on your path of awakening and I hope that my seventeen-year
journey of Self-discovery with the Kundalini energy has been of service
to you, as intended.
—Neven Paar

List of Figures:
Figure 1: Kundalini Rising and the Chakras
Figure 2: The Three Nadis Post-Kundalini Awakening
Figure 3: The Universe Inside the Head
Figure 4: The Tree of Life/Seven Chakras/Kundalini
Figure 5: The Complete Kundalini Circuit
Figure 6: The Brain Filled with Light
Figure 7: The Seventy-Two Thousand Nadis
Figure 8: The Cosmic Egg
Figure 9: The Five Elements and the Seven Chakras
Figure 10: The Pentagram
Figure 11: The Four Worlds and the Tetragrammaton (YHVH)
Figure 12: The Pentagrammaton (YHShinVH)
Figure 13: The Tree of Life Sephiroth and the Three Nadis
Figure 14: The Inner Cosmic Planes
Figure 15: Ida and Pingala Nadis and Ajna Chakra
Figure 16: The Electromagnetic Field of the Earth
Figure 17: The Human Aura
Figure 18: Stressful Energy Entering and Leaving the Aura
Figure 19: Progression of Auric Colours from Lowest to Highest
Chakra
Figure 20: Aura Anatomy
Figure 21: Energetic Problems in the Aura
Figure 22: The Kundalini Toroidal Field
Figure 23: The Seven Chakras and Nerve Plexuses
Figure 24: Brain Expansion and Chakric Correspondences
Figure 25: Halo Around the Head
Figure 26: The Minor Head Chakras (Crown)
Figure 27: The Foot Chakras
Figure 28: The Hand Chakras
Figure 29: Healing Energy Generation and Transmission (Palms)
Figure 30: Healing Energy from the Hands
Figure 31: Location of the Psychic Eyes

Figure 32: The Transpersonal Chakras
Figure 33: The Hara (Navel) Chakra
Figure 34: The Causal/Bindu Chakra
Figure 35: The Transpersonal Chakras Above the Crown
Figure 36: Metatron’s Cube and the Merkaba
Figure 37: Orientation of Tetrahedrons in Males and Females
Figure 38: The Merkaba: Vehicle of Light (in Males)
Figure 39: Kundalini Awakening and Merkaba Optimization
Figure 40: The Endocrine Glands in the Body
Figure 41: The Major Brain Centres
Figure 42: The Limbic System
Figure 43: The Reticular Formation
Figure 44: The Parts of the Brain
Figure 45: The Central and Peripheral Nervous Systems
Figure 46: The Vagus Nerve
Figure 47: The Twelve Pairs of Cranial Nerves
Figure 48: The Spinal Cord (Cross-Section)
Figure 49: CSF and the Brain Ventricles (Lateral/Side View)
Figure 50: The Brain Ventricles (Front View)
Figure 51: Conus Medullaris and Filum Terminale
Figure 52: The Sacrum and Coccyx
Figure 53: The Uncoiled Kundalini
Figure 54: The Sacral Plexus
Figure 55: The Sciatic Nerves and Energy Channels in the Legs
Figure 56: Kundalini/Caduceus of Hermes/DNA's Double Helix
Figure 57: The Electromagnetic Field of the Heart
Figure 58: The Human Heart and the Circulatory System
Figure 59: The Heart Chakra Center
Figure 60: Kundalini Awakening and the Heart EMF
Figure 61: The Seven Male and Female Chakras
Figure 62: Chakric Positions of the Seven Ancient Planets
Figure 63: Spiritual Evolution
Figure 64: Crystal Shapes and Formations
Figure 65: Gemstone Placement on the Chakras
Figure 66: Amplifying a Crystal with Clear Quartz Shards
Figure 67: Sending Healing Energy through the Palms
Figure 68: Optimising the Spin of Chakras with Crystal Wands

Figure 69: Seven Chakras Tuning Fork Set with Soul Star (Weighted)
Figure 70: Harmonic Spectrum Tuning Fork Set (Unweighted)
Figure 71: Placement of Tuning Forks in Chakric Healing
Figure 72: Using Weighted Tuning Forks on Yourself
Figure 73: Working with Two Tuning Forks at the Same Time
Figure 74: Sacred Solfeggio Frequencies and the Layers of the Aura
Figure 75: Sacred Solfeggio Frequencies and the Chakras
Figure 76: Sacred Solfeggio Tuning Forks (Unweighted)
Figure 77: Placing Tuning Forks by the Ears
Figure 78: Essential Oils and a Diffuser
Figure 79: Aromatherapy and the Limbic System
Figure 80: The Five Major Tattvas
Figure 81: The Twenty-Five Sub-Elemental Tattvas
Figure 82: The Tattvas and the Chakras
Figure 83: The Author’s Tattva Cards
Figure 84: The Eight Limbs of Yoga
Figure 85: The Five Koshas
Figure 86: The Three Meditation Asanas
Figure 87: Beginner Asanas (Part I)
Figure 88: Beginner Asanas (Part II)
Figure 89: Beginner Asanas (Part III)
Figure 90: Intermediate Asanas (Part I)
Figure 91: Intermediate Asanas (Part II)
Figure 92: Advanced Asanas (Part I)
Figure 93: Advanced Asanas (Part II)
Figure 94: Shavasana
Figure 95: Abdominal/Diaphragmatic Breathing
Figure 96: Yogic Breathing (Three-Part Breath)
Figure 97: Alternate Nostril Breathing
Figure 98: Ujjayi Pranayama (Glottis Position)
Figure 99: Humming Bee Breath
Figure 100: Sheetali Pranayama
Figure 101: Sheetkari Pranayama
Figure 102: Moorcha Pranayama (Method#1)
Figure 103: Moorcha Pranayama (Method#2)
Figure 104: The Three Granthis
Figure 105: The Fingers and the Five Elements

Figure 106: Jnana Mudra
Figure 107: Chin Mudra
Figure 108: Hridaya Mudra
Figure 109: Shunya Mudra
Figure 110: Anjali Mudra
Figure 111: Yoni Mudra
Figure 112: Bhairava Mudra
Figure 113: Lotus Mudra
Figure 114: Shiva Linga Mudra
Figure 115: Kundalini Mudra
Figure 116: Shambhavi Mudra
Figure 117: Nasikagra Drishti
Figure 118: Shanmukhi Mudra
Figure 119: Viparita Karani
Figure 120: Pashinee Mudra
Figure 121: Tadagi Mudra
Figure 122: Manduki Mudra
Figure 123: Mula Bandha Contraction Point
Figure 124: Standing Uddiyana Bandha
Figure 125: Sitting Uddiyana Bandha (With Jalandhara Bandha)
Figure 126: Jiva Bandha
Figure 127: Maha Mudra
Figure 128: Vajroli, Sahajoli, and Ashwini Mudras Contraction Points
Figure 129: The Five Prana Vayus
Figure 130: Hand Mudras for the Five Prana Vayus
Figure 131: Redirecting the Flow of Prana, Apana, and Samana
Figure 132: Maha Bandha: Applying the Three Bandhas
Figure 133: The Brahmarandhra
Figure 134: Sushumna Nadi Layers and the Cosmic Egg
Figure 135: Lalana (Talu) Chakra and the Bindu Visarga
Figure 136: Basic Khechari Mudra
Figure 137: Advanced Khechari Mudra
Figure 138: Counting Mala Beads
Figure 139: The Goddess Saraswati
Figure 140: Bija Mantras of the Chakric Petals
Figure 141: The Seven Chakras Mudras/Mantras
Figure 142: Visualization Meditation

Figure 143: Candle Flame Meditation (Trataka)
Figure 144: Candle Flame Placement
Figure 145: Hand Mudras for the Five Elements
Figure 146: The Five Elements and the Three Doshas
Figure 147: The Three Doshas and Body Zones
Figure 148: The Author's Vedic Astrology Birth Chart
Figure 149: Lord Ganesha and the Ashta Siddhis
Figure 150: Holy Guardian Angel (The Higher Self)
Figure 151: Lucid Dream Projection
Figure 152: The Human Brain Antenna
Figure 153: Sahasrara Chakra Lotus
Figure 154: Kundalini Flow through Sushumna
Figure 155: The Heart Chakra and Oneness
Figure 156: Flying Like Superman in a Lucid Dream
Figure 157: Close Encounters of the Fifth Kind
Figure 158: Shiva and Shakti in a Loving Embrace
Figure 159: Sexual Arousal in Males
Figure 160: Becoming a Spiritual Warrior
Figure 161: Cannabis Leaf and its Magickal Correspondences
Figure 162: The Major Head Energy Centres
Figure 163: The Kundalini Meditations
Figure 164: Human Energy Potential Optimisation

List of Tables:
Table 1: The Twelve Chakras and their Correspondences
TABLE 2: Essential Oils for the Seven Chakras
TABLE 3: Tattva Correspondences
TABLE 4: Ayurvedic Constitution Chart (Three Doshas)
TABLE 5: Food Guidelines for the Three Doshas
TABLE 6: The Seven Ancient Planets and their Correspondences
TABLE 7: The Twelve Zodiac and their Correspondences

SERPENT RISING: THE KUNDALINI COMPENDIUM
By Neven Paar
Contents
AUTHOR’S JOURNEY TO WRITING THIS BOOK
The Divine Voice
Spiritual Evolution and Personal Power
Kundalini Awakening
Magick of the Golden Dawn
Second Kundalini Rising
Creative Expressions
Finding My Purpose
A Man on a Mission
PART I: KUNDALINI AWAKENING
INTRODUCTION TO THE KUNDALINI
Kundalini Awakening Process
Activating The Body of Light
Spiritual Gifts and Sense Upgrades
THE TREE OF LIFE AND THE CHAKRAS
Purifying the Chakras
SPIRITUAL HEALING PRACTICES
THE KUNDALINI TRANSFORMATION
Bindu Activation
Eradication of Memory
Complete Metamorphosis
Light and Vibration Inside the Head
TYPES OF KUNDALINI RISINGS
Partial and Permanent Kundalini Awakenings
Seeing the Light in All Things
KUNDALINI AWAKENING FACTORS
Completing the Kundalini Awakening Process
Aligning With The Spiritual Body
Your New Lamborghini Veneno
PART II: THE MICROCOSM AND MACROCOSM
THE FIVE ELEMENTS
The Pentagram

The Four Worlds and the Pentagrammaton
The Elements in Nature
The Spirit Element
The Fire Element
The Water Element
The Air Element
The Earth Element
THE COSMIC PLANES
The Five Cosmic Planes
The Divine Planes
Variation in the Auric Layers Sequence
IDA, PINGALA, AND THE ELEMENTS
Left and Right Brain Hemispheres
Nadi Short-Circuits
PART III: THE SUBTLE ENERGY SYSTEM
THE AURA-TOROIDAL ENERGY FIELD
The Human Aura
Aura Characteristics
Aura Anatomy (Areas of Colour)
Energetic Problems in the Aura
The Aura and Vibrations
Kundalini and the Aura
THE SEVEN MAJOR CHAKRAS
Seven Chakras and the Nervous System
Purifying the Chakras
Brain Expansion
Consciousness Expansion Phenomena
THE MINOR CHAKRAS
The Head Chakras
The Foot Chakras
The Hand Chakras
Healing with the Hands
Infusion of Spirit Energy
The Psychic Eyes
THE TRANSPERSONAL CHAKRAS
Earth Star Chakra
Hara Chakra (Navel)

Causal Chakra (Bindu)
Soul Star Chakra
Stellar Gateway
The Hara Line
The Fifth Dimension
The Merkaba-Vehicle of Light
The Return to the Garden Of Eden
The Solar Flash Event
PART IV: KUNDALINI ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
AWAKENING THE MIND’S EYE
THE SEVEN CHAKRAS AND THE ENDOCRINE GLANDS
Chakra Healing and the Endocrine Glands
SPIRITUAL AWAKENING AND BRAIN ANATOMY
The Pituitary Gland
The Pineal Gland
The Pineal Gland and Spirituality
The Thalamus
The Reticular Formation
Parts of the Brain
THE NERVOUS SYSTEM
Strong/Weak Nervous Systems
Yoga and the Nervous System
Kundalini Awakening and the Nervous System
Vagus Nerve Function
The Vagus Nerve and the Kundalini
The Twelve Pairs of Cranial Nerves
CEREBROSPINAL FLUID (CSF)
Brain Ventricles
CSF and Kundalini Awakening
MULADHARA AND KUNDALINI
The Sacrum and Coccyx
Sacral Plexus and Sciatic Nerve
Bringing it All Together
THE POWER OF THE HEART
Heart-Brain Connection
Body Coherence
The Heart and Vibrations

The Heart and Relationships
Human Behaviour and Cause and Effect
Opening the Heart Chakra
Kundalini and Heart Expansions
PART V: SEVEN CHAKRAS HEALING MODALITIES
MALE AND FEMALE CHAKRAS
Gender Characteristics of the Chakras
Balancing the Chakras
ASTROLOGY AND THE SEVEN CHAKRAS
Western Astrology vs. Vedic Astrology
The Seven Ancient Planets
SPIRITUAL HEALING AND EVOLUTION
GEMSTONES (CRYSTALS)
Crystal Formations and Shapes
Twenty-Four Significant Gemstone Types
Cleansing Gemstones
Programming Gemstones
Chakra Healing with Gemstones
TUNING FORKS
Tuning Fork Types and Use
Chakra Tuning Fork Sets
Tuning Fork Chakra Healing
Sacred Solfeggio Tuning Forks
AROMATHERAPY
Using Essential Oils
How Essential Oils Work
Essential Oils For the Seven Chakras
THE TATTVAS
The Process of Creation
The Thirty Tattvas System
The Five Major Tattvas
Tattva Scrying
PART VI: THE SCIENCE OF YOGA (WITH AYURVEDA)
THE PURPOSE OF YOGA
Types of Yoga
THE FIVE KOSHAS
The Subtle Bodies in the East and West

ASANA
The Three Meditation Asanas
Hatha Yoga vs. Vinyasa Yoga
Preparing for Asana Practice
Tips for Your Asana Practice
Beginner Asanas
Intermediate Asanas
Advanced Asanas
PRANAYAMA
Pranayama Exercises
THE THREE GRANTHIS
MUDRA
Hasta (Hand Mudras)
Mana (Head Mudras)
Kaya (Postural Mudras)
Bandha (Lock Mudras)
Adhara (Perineal Mudras)
THE FIVE PRANA VAYUS
Prana and Apana
Awakening the Kundalini
SUSHUMNA AND BRAHMARANDHRA
LALANA CHAKRA AND AMRITA NECTAR
Khechari Mudra and its Variations
MANTRA
The Sacred Number 108
Japa Meditation
Meditation Mantras
BIJA MANTRAS AND MUDRAS OF THE SEVEN CHAKRAS
MEDITATION (DHYANA)
Yogic Practice and Meditation
Three Meditation Methods
Meditation Steps
Candle Flame Meditation (Trataka)
YOGA AND THE FIVE ELEMENTS
Activating and Balancing the Elements
AYURVEDA
The Three Doshas

How to Determine Your Doshic Ratio
Ayurvedic Diet
Yogic Practices To Balance the Doshas
SIDDHIS-PSYCHIC POWERS
The Eight Major Siddhis
PART VII: POST-KUNDALINI AWAKENING
SYMPTOMS AND PHENOMENA AFTER AWAKENING KUNDALINI
Holy Guardian Angel (The Higher Self)
State of Being After the Awakening
Chakras, Subtle Bodies, and Dreams
Lucid Dreaming
Astral Light Building Up and Expanding
The Holographic Universe
Further Gifts Unveiling
Kriyas and Synchronistic Events
THE NEED FOR SPIRITUAL ALCHEMY
Challenges in Your Personal Life
Aligning With the Body of Light
BODILY CHANGES AND DIET
Developing Allergies
The Essential Nutrients For Transformation
Physical Exercise and Illness
THE NEED FOR DISCRETION
The Folly of Prescription Medication
CREATIVITY AND MENTAL HEALTH
Kundalini and Mental Health
Strengthening the Willpower
Kundalini and Creativity
SAHASRARA AND THE DUALITY OF THE MIND
Introvert vs. Extrovert
Emotions vs. Reason
KUNDALINI AND FOOD TRANSFORMATION
Food Sublimation/Transformation
Thoughts in "Real-Time"
EMPATHY AND TELEPATHY
ETHICS AND MORALS
PART VIII: KUNDALINI AND LUCID DREAMS

THE WORLD OF LUCID DREAMS
Waking Up in a Dream
Developing Abilities in Your Dreams
Karmic Energy in Dream States
Binah and the Astral Blueprint
Sleep Paralysis
How to Induce a Lucid Dream
Off-World Experiences in Lucid Dreams
PART IX: KUNDALINI-LOVE, SEXUALITY, AND WILLPOWER
LOVE AND RELATIONSHIPS
The Four Forms of Love
Romantic Love
Love of Friends
Familial Love
KUNDALINI AND SEXUAL ENERGY
Sexual Arousal and Being "Horny"
Sexual Relations
Retaining Your Sexual Energy
Sexual Cravings
SEXUAL ATTRACTION
The First Two Minutes of Meeting
The Psychology of Attraction
The Importance of Inner Beliefs
BECOMING A SPIRITUAL WARRIOR
Dealing With Positive and Negative Energies
Building up Your Willpower
To Change Your Mood, Change Your State
THE POWER OF LOVE
Love and the Principle of Polarity
The Ego and the Higher Self
BEING A CO-CREATOR OF YOUR REALITY
Manifesting Your Destiny
Work and School Life
Inspiration and Music
PART X: KUNDALINI DAMAGE-CONTROL
KUNDALINI AND SHORT-CIRCUITS
KUNDALINI AND RECREATIONAL DRUGS

Cannabis and its Properties
Kundalini and Cannabis Use
Types and Strains of Cannabis
Methods of Using Cannabis
Cannabis Concentrates and Edibles
Controlled Substances and Short-Circuits
PART XI: KUNDALINI MEDITATIONS
TROUBLESHOOTING THE SYSTEM
PART XII: KUNDALINI COUNSELLING
GENERAL TIPS
COMMON QUESTIONS
EPILOGUE
APPENDIX
SUPPLEMENTARY TABLES
GLOSSARY OF SELECTED TERMS
BIBLIOGRAPHY

AUTHOR’S JOURNEY TO WRITING
THIS BOOK
The Divine Voice
My whole life, I've been haunted by a voice I've never heard. But my
mother heard it. And somehow, I owe my life to it. She only heard it once.
And because she listened, I'm still here. But even before that voice made
itself known to her, I was plagued by different Demons.
You see, from the moment I was born, I was deadly ill. I had an
ongoing high fever, couldn't keep food down, and couldn't sleep. It was as if
some invisible, external force did not want me to survive. So every time I
got better, I would end right back where I started, the hospital.
Whatever was trying to kill me soon found out I was a stubborn baby
who didn't want to give up. Nobody knew what was wrong with me, and
nothing the doctors were doing was helping. Finally, they were so puzzled
by my mysterious illness that they invited medical students to see me and
hopefully find answers.
My mother, Gordana, stood by my side and prayed daily for my
recovery. She wasn't a religious woman, but she believed that her pain
allowed her to contact some higher Divine force and request its help. After
all, she was my guardian, my protector. Then, after three years of being in
and out of the hospital almost daily and putting my family through Hell, I
miraculously recovered. Whatever my mother prayed to must have
answered.
If it was some otherworldly force that wanted me gone from this
world, it failed. Instead, there was an opposite power that wanted me to
survive. And so, I grew up with a boon that protected me from rough times.
I felt like maybe I had a purpose in this world, even though it took me many
years to find it truly. But before I found it, there would be another trial I
would have to overcome.
It was the spring of 1992 in a country on the brink of war, Yugoslavia.
We had just come out of the building's bomb shelter after a night of
listening to gunshots in the background, exhausted. Although tensions grew
between opposing factions, most people believed that things would blow

over soon and life would go back to normal. There weren't many people
willing to leave everything behind without certainty that a full-blown war
would erupt.
It was five in the morning, and my sister Nikol and I went straight to
bed, as did my father, Zoran. My mother lay down beside him and put her
head on the pillow, emotionally and mentally worn out. She looked at the
clock beside her, watching the needle move around its centre,
contemplating the predicament we were in and what the future held for our
family.
What happened next was going to change everything and create a new
branch in the timeline of our lives. This unique event would not only take
us from one continent to the next, but it was a precursor to a monumental
Spiritual journey for me—one that would shape me into a messenger of
God-the Creator.
Suddenly, an authoritative male voice began to speak to her in her right
ear. It wasn't my father since he was sound asleep on her left side, lightly
snoring as he usually does. The voice spoke in a calm yet commanding
tone, heralding the things to come for the people in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It said that a war would indeed break out in my hometown.
Garbage would fill the streets, food and water would be scarce, and there
would be no heat and electricity. This Divine Voice said that she needed to
leave the city with my sister and me immediately. That was her mission.
She regained consciousness, but something had changed in her. Her
mind was going a mile a minute as if she was still in some trance. What just
happened? Her experience left her both shocked and mystified. Most of all,
she was scared. And she knew that this feeling of fear wasn't going to leave
until she did something about it.
She didn't wake my father yet. Instead, she tried to collect her
thoughts. As she was doing that, she began preparing our passports and
other travel documents. Then, against all logic, she left the bedroom and
began to pack a suitcase for all of us. She knew in her heart what she had to
do, and nothing anyone would say could stop her.
After one suitcase was loosely packed, she made a coffee and sipped it
beside the living room window, shaking. Then, heavy with emotion, she
looked outwards onto the adjacent playground to our building,
contemplating the strength she would have to exhibit the next few days to
fulfil her mission and save her children.

Suddenly, two hands were on her shoulders, shaking her. "Gordana,
Gordana, can you hear me? Say something! My mother must have looked
like a woman possessed. Then, finally, she turned to my father and came
back to reality. "We have to leave the city," she yelled. "Now!"
The rest of that day wasn't easy for my mother since nobody believed
her story. Being a very logical man, my father tried to rationalize her
experience and thought it was a trick of the imagination. After all, it was
such an extraordinary story to believe happened to an ordinary family like
ours. She knew what she heard, though, and steadfast as she was, there was
no stopping her. She had to secure the safety of her children and take us out
of the city immediately.
And so, she packed our bags and bought us plane tickets so we could
fly out the next day. Unfortunately, my father didn't feel the same sense of
urgency as my mother, plus he was still waiting for some essential
documents before a major travelling expedition, so he planned to stay
behind and meet with us in a few weeks.
The next day, we got to the airport around noon. Right before boarding
started, the unthinkable happened. Shooting began at the airport from all
sides. If the country was on the brink of war, this was the precipice. The
shots usually occurred during the night, so this was different. People at the
airport began to scramble in panic, kneeling every time they heard a shot
while others were lying on their stomachs. It was chaos. This went on for
the next four hours. It seemed like we weren't going to be able to leave the
city anymore.
Finally, the shooting briefly stopped long enough for us to board the
plane. Our medium-sized passenger aircraft became so packed with people
that there weren't enough seats for everyone, so many were left standing,
including us. It seemed that all the people at the airport rebooked their
tickets to get on our plane.
Once the plane took off, I looked outwards through the window at my
hometown as it got smaller and smaller, not knowing this would be the last
time I saw it for many years. During the plane ride, I remember my mother
holding both my sister and me with tears in her eyes. She completed her
mission, but this was just the beginning of our arduous journey, and she
knew it. Once we landed in the neighbouring country of Serbia, we got
word that our plane was the last plane that left the city. After escaping in the
nick of time, the airport was officially shut down.

The war began in Bosnia that day and lasted for three long years.
Sarajevo, my hometown, was under siege. When we said goodbye to my
father at the airport, we had no idea it would be the last time we would see
each other for a long time. Oh, how I wished that he came with us, but fate
played its hand for all of us that day.
The war was religious, with political connotations, the reasons for
which I will not get into at the present moment. As pertains to the story I
am about to tell you, everything that the Divine Voice said would happen
did indeed happen. A Divine Intervention saved our lives—the reason for
which was unknown to me at the time.
As the days passed, my mother wished the Divine Voice returned to
guide her. It accomplished the job of securing her children's safety from
immediate danger, but as the war began to widen, it was hard to know
where we should go next to avoid the chaos that became unleashed in my
country. And so, we bounced around from one city and country to the next,
orbiting Bosnia and Herzegovina, waiting patiently for my father to get a
chance to leave and join us.
The front lines of the war were in my neighbourhood. Many people
died in my hometown, especially around where I lived. It was horrific to
hear about the atrocities that happened to the people living in Sarajevo.
Neighbour fought against neighbour; one could not leave their home for
fear of being gunned down by snipers. When people ran out of food and
water and had to leave their homes to resupply, they said goodbye to their
loved ones, not knowing if they would return. We received this information
firsthand from my father, who sadly had to endure it all.
By the end of the war, my mother lost both of her parents and brother.
Yet, she did what the Divine Voice said, so why weren't her people spared?
When I found out about my family and friends perishing in the war, I was
sad and confused. Why were we saved, and others were not? I began to
question my mother when she told me about the Divine Voice. For some
reason, I was the only one that believed her. Most people thought we got
lucky to leave last second, but I knew there was more to it than that. It is as
if the information she gave me activated something inside me, but it would
take many years for the next piece of the puzzle to unravel itself.
It was not until I had a Kundalini awakening in 2004 that I thought
maybe it had something to do with this Divine Intervention, considering it
was such a rare and monumental Spiritual experience. Perhaps we were

saved so that I would experience everything I did after the Kundalini
awakening, and seventeen years later would be writing these very words to
you, the reader. Perhaps my message is vital to the people in the world in
today's day and age.

Spiritual Evolution and Personal Power
After two long years of living in Hell, my father came to join us in
Croatia. Soon after, the four of us came to Toronto, Canada, as war refugees
and started our lives here in North America. My parents promised me that
Canada would be a fresh start and that I could be anything I wanted and be
free to pursue any dreams I had. I soon realised that the highest calling or
pursuit that I cared about most of all was to be happy. The best way to
honour all the people who didn't make it in my country was to be happy and
lead a good life since they couldn't.
As my teenage years passed, I noticed I was different. For one, none of
my friends felt emotions as strongly as I felt them. Where they had crushes,
I had crushing obsessions. I was an extremist by nature. It wasn't just
enough to allow life to throw things my way; I would actively chase down
the things that made me happy and bring them home to me.
Other people were looking for a quick high, but I wanted to stay there
forever. There was no sense of coming back down to Earth after you had a
taste of what else was out there. Once I embraced the transcendence of true
love, how could I ever return?
Part of me knew it couldn't be this easy, that I could take a pill, smoke
a herb and suddenly be in Heaven. And yet it was; you're feeling normal
one second, and the next, you are entirely in a different state. But it wasn't
enough to get high on the weekends; I wanted to live in that state forever. I
wanted to achieve a permanent state of happiness.
My first quest to find that was through love. The problem with it is that
you don't have complete control since it's a partnership. So, even if I felt
pure love energy and devotion to that person, if they didn't feel it the same
way, then it wasn't real. It was like a magic trick without an audience. And
so, I knew that there was more out there for me, but I didn't quite
understand what that could be.
It was not until my high school years that I started to connect to the
Spirit and learn about God-the Creator, during my first long-term
relationship. This feeling of being in love opened me up Spiritually for the

first time, and I became a seeker of the Light. Learning about the invisible
reality of the Spirit is something I was predisposed to from an early age, as
many of my philosophies on life just came naturally.
I was always focused on pleasure and the pursuit of happiness, so I got
engaged to my first love thinking I could bypass all the trials and
tribulations in life. However, the Universe had other plans for me. Once my
relationship catastrophically ended, I was at a crossroads in my life. Instead
of dwelling on my loss and being depressed, I decided to use the
momentum I gained from learning about the Spirit and continue my
journey.
I collected everything that reminded me of her and put it into a black
garbage bag. Then, in a nearby forest, I burned everything in the blazing
fire to symbolise a new beginning in my life. As I watched the smoke rise
and the artefacts turn to ashes, I felt the Gods looking down on me and
finally saying, "The boy is ready now."
I had gone to University for Architecture during the day as my parents
desired of me. When my classes ended and the night set it, I continued my
studies in other ways. Through the books I was reading and putting those
lessons into practise, I began rebuilding and refining myself. I realised I
could still have women in my life and experience that love reciprocation,
but without the same type of attachment as before. In the same fashion, I
was detached from the person I was becoming to constantly remake myself
into something better. And so, daily, I shed my skin like a snake. Like a
phoenix who rises out of the ashes renewed. The more knowledge and
wisdom I internalised prevented me from being a slave to my
overwhelming emotions.
After experiencing love, the next step was to develop my personal
power, so I learned about attraction between men and women. I began
learning how to manifest whatever reality I desired and realised it was
possible once the proper knowledge is integrated. I was a scientist of the
mind as I tested the limits of human potential in many areas. I sought to
master my mind once I learned of its power to shape what we call "reality."
I realised that I can tap into the mind's full potential when I can access the
"Now," the present moment. I became obsessed with mastering this skill
since it brought on the genuine excitement and joy of being alive.
Certain areas of my life became chaos. It's not that I wanted
everything, but I pursued everything. I turned the same intensity I had for

seeking love into the pursuit of Spiritual knowledge. I imbued each book
with the same passion and devotion as I did my ex-fiance, so I filled myself
with knowledge and wisdom daily. There seemed no limit to how much I
could learn. And I realised that a man could spend an entire life reading
every book without putting into practice what he has learned.
It was then that The Kybalion came into my hands. The manual to life
itself. It was the first time that I truly fell in love again. I knew that I needed
to devote myself to this book and integrate every sentence into my mind
and heart to extract its Eternal wisdom. This was the second Divine
intervention in my life and the precursor and catalyst to a Kundalini
awakening I was to have that same year.
The Kybalion is a Hermetic occult book discussing the Universal
Laws, referred to as the Principles of Creation. (Note that italicized terms
are further defined in the Glossary at the back of the book.) The Kybalion
focuses most of its teachings on the power of the mind and states that the
"All is Mind, the Universe is Mental." It says that we live in the "Dream of
God" and that everything is "thought" energy, including the Physical World.
This thought energy is the very Spirit that religious and Spiritual texts speak
of. The difference between the thought of God and one of man is just a
matter of a degree or frequency of vibration. Our power of the mind and
ability to think is what shapes our reality.
I worked with the Laws and Principles of The Kybalion daily, and it
was compellingly transforming me from the inside. I had the utmost faith in
The Kybalion Principles and was so fascinated by this book that I carried it
with me everywhere I went. I was being remodelled daily by everything I
was learning and experiencing. Along with growing in wisdom, I focused
on transforming myself into an attractive and powerful man. I enhanced my
dating life to an unimaginable degree using the Principles in The Kybalion.
The summer of 2004 was the culmination of everything I was
experiencing and learning, and I obtained a level of personal power in my
life that I had only dreamed of before. My life was a movie, and I was the
main star. I had developed myself into a Mystic, a "Wizard of the Mind."
My Spiritual journey was on an upward trajectory, and I felt it was just a
matter of time before something extraordinary happened.

Kundalini Awakening

In October of 2004, after reading The Kybalion over twenty times, I
had a few new epiphanies about the Principles of Creation. Firstly, we have
a Spiritual double, a replica within us made of pure Spirit, which occupies
the same space and time, but our consciousness is not attuned to it.
Secondly, our power of imagination and ability to think things into
existence is far more potent than we give it credit. As God-the Creator
imagined us, we can imagine and experience our images as real if we only
choose to believe what we see. Testing these two new understandings that
evening during a meditation, which unknowingly was a form of Tantric sex
practice, resulted in a very intense Kundalini awakening.
A powerful stream of energy rose up my spinal column, blowing open
the Chakras simultaneously on the way up. It entered my head and brain
and enveloped my whole Being with Light. It pierced my Mind's Eye,
expanding it exponentially before rising to the Crown and resulting in a
liquid fire pouring over my body, awakening what I later learned are the
Seventy-Two Thousand Nadis or energetic channels. This experience was
coupled by a powerful vibratory sound I heard on the inside, which at its
peak sounded like a jet plane engine upon takeoff.
The climax was me opening my eyes as I was being "electrocuted" by
this energy from the inside and seeing the room I was in as a Hologram, and
my hands made of pure golden Light. This sight changed how I view reality
forever. My first Out-of-Body Experience (OBE) followed this, where I saw
the onset of the White Light as my consciousness was being sucked out of
my body.
The entire experience left me mystified and confused. What just
happened to me? It took me two months of obsessive research to figure out
what that was, and since then, my life has never been the same again. After
my Kundalini awakening, I was awakened to a reality which I never knew
existed—the Fourth Dimension of Vibration or Energy. It was the stuff of a
Hollywood movie on Mysticism and Spirituality. I felt like I had just won
the lottery—one which was unknown to people even to exist.
Transcendental experiences became a standard way of living as I was
being transformed in mind, body and Soul daily. It soon became apparent
that my consciousness had expanded as I began to perceive the reality
around me from a much higher source. I started to view the world around
me from God's perspective as if standing in the clouds and looking down on
everything like I am looking at an architectural model. I now perceived

Light in all things, which gave everything I looked at a digital makeover.
Over time, I developed the ability to see people's energy fields (Auras) and
intuitively feel their energy inside of me. This experience gave me
telepathic and empathic abilities that were a gift and a curse at the same
time.
My dream world opened up to a whole new reality as well. I started
having Out-of-Body Experiences nightly, where I flew in strange yet
beautiful lands and exhibited powers reminiscent of super-heroes in movies.
I felt like I had become a super-hero myself since no one I knew or heard
of, other than Gopi Krishna (whom I read about at the time), described this
new world I was projected into. It was the same world that I lived in before
but enhanced inside me by Light energy brought on by the Kundalini. This
Light remodelled my old Self and transformed me into something new,
better, more advanced.
I accepted the call from the Divine to learn anything and everything
about Spirituality, religion, philosophy, psychology, and other topics about
God-the Creator and the destiny of humanity. I became obsessed with
developing myself into a Messianic presence, as I felt it was my calling. As
some other people do in my position, I never sought to be the "One" since I
knew from the onset that we are all the "One". We all are Beings of Light
and have the potential to awaken the Kundalini and transcend this material
world.
I knew that my calling was to be a messenger of God-the Creator—and
my message was the Kundalini. I became a believer that the purpose of the
Divine Intervention, which saved my sister and me in 1992, was for this
exact reason. As such, I aligned myself completely with Hermes
Trismegistus, considering that so much of my Spiritual journey was related
to his teachings.
Hermes is also the messenger God in the Greek and Roman pantheons,
the intermediary between the Gods and humans. The unique wand that he
carries in all of his pictorial depictions, the Caduceus, symbolises the
Kundalini energy itself.
Even though I began living an otherworldly existence, I was
undergoing intense episodes of fear and anxiety very often, considering that
all of my Chakras were activated fully after the Kundalini awakening. I felt
blessed to have had the awakening, but since I often had to deal with
incredible fear and anxiety, it felt like a bane also. Furthermore, I learned

that other people who also underwent a full Kundalini awakening, such as
my own, were also experiencing this. Sadly, this double-edged sword was
something we all had to learn to live with and endure. However, I did not
want to accept that. If there is a will, there is a way, I thought. Every
problem has a solution. The Kybalion taught me that. So I became
determined to help myself at all costs and began to seek various ways of
doing so.
I tried many different Spiritual practices within a year of awakening
the Kundalini, from Yoga to transcendental meditation to Gemstones
(Crystals) and beyond. To show you how desperate I was, I even joined
Scientology for a month and practised their method of becoming a "clear."
But, sadly, nothing seemed to work for me. I still had fear and anxiety
present in my heart that was debilitating me daily and a loud vibration in
my ears that was very uncomfortable, keeping me up all night. I had almost
given up hope until my Higher Self led me to the doorstep of an ancient
mystery school—the Golden Dawn. Consequently enough, Ceremonial
Magick, which they practised, sounded like the possible solution to my
problem.

Magick of the Golden Dawn
I joined the Esoteric Order of the Golden Dawn in the summer of 2005
to help with the emotional and mental issues that plagued me. Ceremonial
Magick involves using ritual exercises to invoke energy into the Aura. I
delved deep into the Hermetic Golden Dawn system right from the start. As
I progressed through the different grades or levels, I worked with Elemental
energies, which correspond with the Chakras.
There are Five Elements of Earth, Water, Air, Fire, and Spirit related to
the Seven Chakras. The first four Chakras correspond with Earth, Water,
Fire and Air Elements, while the last three higher Chakras belong to the
Spirit Element. The Elemental energies correspond with different parts of
the psyche, such as emotions, thoughts, reason, willpower, imagination,
memory, intuition, etc. Working with the Elements enabled me to fine-tune
those parts of myself, which was necessary to integrate the newly expanded
consciousness.
The energies I was invoking through Ceremonial Magick became the
very "tool" I sought after awakening Kundalini. They allowed me to cleanse
my Aura and Chakras of the negativity plaguing me. Furthermore, invoking

the Elements through Ceremonial Magick allowed me to shed my Karmic
energy quicker as it removed all fear and anxiety from inside of me. Not
only that, but it also allowed me to develop different parts of the Self and
realize my full potential.
Ceremonial Magick is a powerful tool to combat one's Karmic energy
and purify the old Self, the Ego whose use allows the higher Will of the
Spirit to take precedence over the consciousness. What stood in the way of
experiencing the newly awakened Spiritual energy was my memory of who
I was, whose foundation is my perception of past events. The Ego processes
reality in dualistic terms, some events accepted as good and some bad,
leaving us chained to a perpetual Karmic wheel, which is continuously in
motion.
The bad memories are locked within the Self and generate attachment
to the Ego through emotional pain and fear. We can access the emotional
charge of memories by invoking the Elements through Ceremonial Magick,
bringing them to the surface from the subconscious to "shed" them through
integration and evolution. As a result, the potential energy stored in the
Chakras in the form of Karma releases back into the Universe, restoring
one's initial state of purity.
After seeing the positive effects it had on me in a short while, I fell in
love with the Golden Dawn system. I had even built a personal Temple in
my home, where I practised Magick daily. Along with the Spiritual
Alchemy process I was undergoing with the Elements, I also learned about
many esoteric topics in the Golden Dawn, including the Qabalah, Tree of
Life, Tarot, Astrology, Hermeticism, and much more.
I developed myself into a ritual master as I practised the art of
Ceremonial Magick daily for just over five years. During this time, I was
initiated into all the Outer Order Grades of the Golden Dawn, which
correspond with the Four Elements. Afterwards, I continued my Magickal
journey on my own as I worked with Adept-level ritual exercises
corresponding with the Spirit Element and beyond.
As I moved around in my house, my first Temple was transformed into
a shared living space, enabling me to build a second, more elaborate Temple
to commemorate my solitary path as a Magi. Consequently, this change
occurred when the communal Toronto Temple fell apart, leaving many
fellow Golden Dawn members without a home. The Divine petitioned me
to open my home to them and use my advanced knowledge and ritual

experience to mentor them. And so, for the first time, the student became
the teacher.
I mentored a group of up to a dozen ex-Golden Dawn members who
came to visit me weekly for teachings and group rituals that I led in. I also
met new friends on the street who were Light seekers, who sought my
Golden Dawn teachings. A few of them were Kundalini awakened
individuals who needed help as I did some years back when I was groping
in the dark for answers.
As my Golden Dawn journey came to a pinnacle, I practised other
Spiritual disciplines that involved the invocation/evocation of Gods and
Goddesses, namely from the Hindu and Voodoo pantheons. I aimed to
experience their energies through the performance of their ritual exercises
and compare them back to what I had learned through Ceremonial Magick.
I also joined Freemasonry because of its Hermetic roots, and within
two years, I attained the highest degree of Master Mason in the Blue Lodge.
I was a scientist of the art of ritual Magick whose laboratory is the invisible
world of energy and sought to find commonalities in the different Spiritual
traditions and religions.
Through my work and the similarities in our paths, I aligned my
vibration with a previous member of the Golden Dawn Order, the infamous
Aleister Crowley. He would contact me often in dreams to impart on me
cryptic teachings in his Shakesperean style of speaking.
I practised Sex Magick with Crowley's guidance for over a year and
used Enochian Magick and the Thirty Aethyrs to "cross the Abyss".
Crossing the Abyss is a process that implies raising your consciousness past
the Mental Plane of duality, where the fear and pain manifest, into the
Spiritual plane of Unity. Once I did this, I fully integrated with
unconditional love energy in the Spiritual Plane and my consciousness
permanently aligned with my Spiritual Body.
This Spiritual achievement allowed me to completely transcend fear
and anxiety, which plagued me since awakening the Kundalini. My
thoughts no longer had any emotional power over me, and I overcame my
negative Karma. And so, my journey with ritual Magick came to an end,
allowing me to focus only on my Kundalini energy from that moment
forward.

Second Kundalini Rising

In early 2010, six years after my initial Kundalini awakening, I had
another intense Kundalini rising. It was nowhere as powerful as the first
rising since that was a once-in-a-lifetime activation. However, to my
surprise, the Kundalini energy rose through my spine into my Crown and
expanded my consciousness further.
I believe that the hard work I had put in with Magick and the fact that I
was no longer invoking outside energy into my Aura stimulated my
Kundalini to reactivate and remove any blockages I had after the initial
awakening. Perhaps I did not awaken all the petals of Sahasrara Chakra
during the initial Kundalini awakening and this second rising served to open
the Crown Lotus fully. Doing so completed the circuit of the Kundalini
energy and opened up a new, essential Chakra at the top back of the head
called the Bindu.
At first, I was undergoing a very intense fire inside me, which was
more unbearable than ever. Ingesting food became an issue since it made
the fire stronger, so I lost twenty pounds the first month after the second
rising. However, I did perceive an even higher sense of consciousness, and
my psychic abilities were heightened. What's most important is that I now
started to function on intuition alone and was in a constant state of
inspiration that is impossible to describe. The word "epic" tossed around
haphazardly nowadays is one I use to describe best how I felt and feel to
this day.
Along with this constant inspiration, I started to feel out of my body in
my waking life, and strange things began to occur. I felt a numbness in my
whole physical body, which has become a permanent part of my life. When
I apply an ice pack on my skin, I cannot feel the cold, but it feels entirely
numb. The same goes for any other part of my physical body. It is as if the
Kundalini gave my body a permanent shot of novocaine, a numbing agent.
A transcendent feeling permeated my heart, and the fire, which was
raging at first, cooled down to become soothing, love energy. I started to
have mystical experiences every time I put on a song I liked, as my
consciousness would lose itself in a few seconds of giving it attention. I fell
in love with epic movie music and felt like it was playing just for me as
every action I performed now felt glorious.
I reached the apex of this Kundalini awakening experience, and as I
brought Prana into my system through food, my consciousness would
continue to expand. The more I ate, the better I felt. I did get some help

from naturopathic medicine, especially Vitamin B Complex, Zinc,
Selenium, Gabba, 5-HTP, and even Saw Palmetto, which worked well to
transform the fire energy. The fear and anxiety present immediately after
the second rising, when my nerves were in overdrive, was gone. It was
washed away by the Prana I was building up through food and the
supplements I took. I gained back the weight I lost as I now lived in this
state of perpetual inspiration 24/7, which is impossible to describe in a way
that will give it the credit it deserves.
My new state of Being became a permanent Out-of-Body Experience
within a short period. I began to perceive myself from outside of myself as
a "Silent Witness" of whatever action my physical body was performing.
My mind became clear and still, and it is when I listen to the thoughts
inside my head, I go inwards and can no longer see myself from the outside.
Otherwise, I can see my facial expressions as if my essence is hovering
right above and in front of me, enabling me to have complete control as to
what energy I put out into the outside world through animating my physical
body.
As I am outside myself, I feel complete rapture and unity with all
things in existence. I perceive the whole world now as an immaculate,
digital simulation; a Hologram, Maya-Illusion. I can hear a constant
vibration within my head as if I am plugged into an electrical outlet, and my
energy system is generating a substantial amount of bio-electricity.
This new state I was in started a memory shedding process, where I
lost touch with the Ego completely and would perceive old memories in my
Mind's Eye, which just came randomly to me throughout the day. This
process seemed endless, and it was occurring all the time. I was in an
inspired state of Being, functioning fully on intuition and being present in
the "Now". I could perceive my thoughts as wave patterns in my Mind's
Eye as I became very attuned to sound. I soon realised that sound is the
most metaphysical of the five senses. I could see the thought images behind
the sound in most things I heard which was and still is very transcendental.
Although I do not associate myself with any religion, I believe that
every Holy scripture holds some kernel of truth. As such, I found many
references between the Kundalini awakening process and Jesus Christ's
teachings. Therefore, I believe that my new state of Being is the Kingdom of
Heaven and the "Glory of the Whole World" he spoke of. I realised that,
like many other Sages and Adepts of history, Jesus had a Kundalini

awakening which enabled him to reach this lofty state of higher
consciousness and then share his experiences and teachings with others to
become awakened as well.

Creative Expressions
With this newfound state of Being, my creativity has expanded a
thousandfold, and I felt the calling to express myself creatively through
different arts. So, I began to paint, considering that painting has been a big
part of my life since childhood. For the first time, I felt a calling to start
painting in the abstract form and allow my newfound creativity to guide my
hand.
I painted many works over the next two years. I never bothered to plan
the subject matter of my painting but just let it come naturally. My goal was
always to be in a state of expression, and my process consisted of
automatically applying different colours until I saw faint images on the
canvas. Then I would focus on them and bring them out further.
I often found myself painting diverse landscapes, which I believe were
real places on Earth. My consciousness would project into these landscapes
and experience them as real as I was immersed in the painting process.
After I ended my session, this painting process would continue in my
Mind's Eye when I closed my eyes. It would go on for about an hour on
automatic, making me believe that I was channelling some images and
forms from outside of myself.
I felt drawn to music, so I began singing in a band about a year after
the second rising. I also started writing Kundalini inspired lyrics/poetry that
flowed out of me effortlessly. I found it came naturally to express myself
through music and words, and since I was so attuned to sound now, time
would fly when I was "jamming" with friends.
I also gave comedy and voice acting a shot since I found myself able
to imitate cultural accents by mimicking their vibration of consciousness.
However, it soon became apparent that these creative expressions were my
Soul's attempt to find the ultimate way to communicate my new state of
Being. As such, I put away visual arts, music, and comedy to pursue
writing. I knew that my destiny was to become not only an embodiment of
the Light but also its emissary.
I began writing articles for Spiritual newsletters and online blogs on
Kundalini and human energy potential. In addition, I gave talks on online

radio shows on the power of Ceremonial Magick as the key to the daily
purification of the Chakras and elevating the consciousness past the fear
and anxiety experienced by Kundalini awakened individuals. I was getting
myself out there now as an Adept in the Western Mysteries and the
Kundalini. My role as a teacher on these subjects solidified more and more
as time went on.
However, before I could fully take the reigns with my Spiritual
direction, I had another test to overcome, which presented as an enticing
once-in-a-lifetime opportunity. Having left the daily practice of Magick for
a few years by this time, the Chief Adept of the Golden Dawn pulled me
back in by offering me to lead my own official Temple here in Toronto. He
was aware of the hard work I put in within the Order, mainly having
organised and mentored a group of Golden Dawn students without a
Spiritual home once the Toronto Temple fell apart. The carrot dangled
before me was the title of Grand Imperator of Canada within the Order,
which meant that I was to oversee all the existing Esoteric Golden Dawn
Temples or sanctuaries in Canada.
At first, I salivated over the idea and welcomed the opportunity with
open arms. Can you blame me? Every aspiring Ceremonial Magi dreams of
leading their own Temple one day and overseeing the affairs of all the
Temples in the entire country. Think of the power and fame of that position.
Thousands of people would revere me. The men would want to be me while
the women would want to be with me. So my Ego thought of the
possibilities and relished in them. This is everything I always wanted, isn't
it?
And so, I pursued this venture for a little while. I organised the few
people in Toronto and began to mentor them. New potential members
started calling me, and I met with some to petition them to join the group. I
did this for about six months, slowly building the sanctuary, which would
eventually become a full-fledged Temple. However, the more I became
engaged in this venture, I noticed my heart was not in it. And day after day,
this became more and more of a problem for me.
You see, when it comes to the Spiritual journey, it was never about
power, fame, women, or any of that stuff for me. It was about finding my
purpose and pursuing it all the way. After all, I never chose to have the
Kundalini awakening; it was determined for me by some higher power.

From the start of my Ceremonial Magick journey, I knew that the Golden
Dawn was always a means to an end and not the end in and of itself.
My final goal, purpose, and ultimate calling was to be a leader within
the field of Kundalini science, not the Golden Dawn Order. And in my
heart, I knew that. Now that I had the second rising and reached the
pinnacle of the transformation process, I knew I had to keep going
unhampered by external influences. I had to focus solely on the Kundalini
energy and let it speak to me and guide me towards my ultimate purpose.
So, I chose to keep going. Keep discovering. Keep writing in my spare time
and let my true purpose solidify over time.

Finding My Purpose
Three years passed, during which I went through many changes and
developments in my personal life. I got engaged for the second time, which
may have been my biggest challenge to date since it forced me to draw out
all of my temporal desires and sacrifice them on the altar of righteousness
to integrate this higher level of consciousness. My ethical and moral nature
became enhanced, and, over time, I learned to function by upholding higher
virtues instead of personal desires. My perseverance to overcome these
challenges and assume dominance over my Ego took me to a higher level
where I talked the talk and walked the walk as well.
After my second engagement ended, I Soul-searched for a year until I
moved to a house—Exbury St. A fitting name since this is where I was to
bury my old Self for good, enabling me to find my purpose finally. During
this time, I quit smoking marijuana—my long-time mistress but a massive
distraction. Following marijuana, drinking and cigarettes came to a
complete halt, as did my desire for partying. These sacrifices set the stage
for something extraordinary, but all I needed was a catalyst to push me
through the doorway—my father.
It was October of 2016, precisely twelve years after awakening the
Kundalini. A fitting number, twelve, represented the completion of a grand
cycle in my life. I wrote about a dozen articles for Spiritual newsletters and
online blogs by that time, but it was merely a hobby, something I did in my
spare time. However, I printed out my latest article for the first time and
brought it to my father to get his opinion, not knowing that his reaction to it
was about to change my life. You see, my father is a very hard guy to

impress if you are just an average person, but if you are me, his
troublemaker son, it is nearly impossible. Until that moment.
He looked it over and put it down, chuckling, telling me not to toy
with him. At first, I was confused with his reaction but then realized he
thought I copied it from somewhere and put my name on it. I had to
convince him for five minutes straight that I had written the article. When I
finally convinced him, his composure changed; he got serious and told me I
have a special gift. He inquired why I am wasting my time with friends and
romantic relationships that never seem to work out and why I am not
entirely devoted to writing. His words impacted me on a deep level. It is as
if something clicked inside of me; some wheel turned and activated a power
within me that was never to turn off again.
Excited that I finally impressed him, I woke up at six in the morning
the following day and started writing. As with my painting and poetry
creative process, I didn't plan what to write; I just wrote. I let the Spirit
guide my hands as I typed away on the computer for hours. And the next
day, I did the same thing. And the next, and the next. Months passed with
me writing almost every day. Some days I would take off since I juggled
my day job that started at ten, but then I wrote the entire weekend to make
up for what I lost that week. Was this it? Did I finally find my purpose? Is
this the reason my family was saved from being stuck in a mindless war
some thirty years ago? Is this why I had the Kundalini awakening,
something I never asked for but that I embraced all these years?
I have worked with my parents in their Architectural design company
since 2004; consequently, the same year I had the awakening. However,
after the first year of my obsessive writing, my parents recognized my
passion and allowed me to start work in the afternoon, enabling me never
again to miss a morning of writing. My original intention was to write one
book. But as the information grew over the next three years, the one book
turned into four bodies of work, each with concise but interrelated subjects,
all centred around the subject of the Kundalini.
The foundation for the book you are reading right now was channelled
to me by my Higher Self during those first three years of writing, as was
most of The Magus: Kundalini and the Golden Dawn and Man of Light, my
autobiography. The fourth body of work deals with my world travels, which
synchronously also began when I started this writing process. This book,

titled Cosmic Star-Child, talks about Ancient civilizations and their
connection not only to the Kundalini energy but to Extraterrestrials.
Writing books became the most optimal way to channel pertinent
information from Divine realms and leave a permanent record. And so, I
accepted my role as the Scribe of the Gods. Consequently, this is the title of
the Egyptian God Thoth, who is Hermes' equivalent. Everything made
perfect sense now. As I discovered my purpose and pursued it every day, I
also found a way to integrate my passion for art into my books. And so, I
broke up my free time to write in the morning and draw pictures at night.
Thus, I found a way to use art to convey the Spiritual messages in my books
and enhance them, which became part and parcel of my daily work.

A Man on a Mission
Although it took many years of Spiritual cleansing and curbing my
lower desires, I discarded my old Self. My newly discovered purpose,
which I pursue every day, gave me a foundation to build a new life around.
After witnessing many years of trials and tribulations, God-the Creator saw
that I was a changed man, a new man that can be trusted to fulfil this most
Holy of tasks and inform the world of the Kundalini energy's existence and
potential.
It was then, in early 2019, that the Universe sent a life partner my way,
Emily. After an epic engagement in Teotihuacan, Mexico, "The City of the
Gods," we married the following year. The third time is the charm, as they
say, but in my case, I needed to find myself and my purpose before I could
finally settle down. And Emily complements my Spiritual journey in a way
that no previous woman in my life has before. Having her in my life
inspires me and gives me the necessary drive to maintain my mission of
finishing my books at all cost.
You see, I could've continued living the life of a playboy, a rockstar,
and even led an occult order. But all of these options were limited, and I
wanted to be limitless. So instead, I chose the unsure, unforged, humble
path of being an author. I decided to go down the road unpaved and pave
the road myself. In truth, I did this for you. So that I may help awaken you
the same way I was awakened and give you the keys to life and death. The
Kingdom of Heaven is for all of us, not just the select few.
Having been born a religious mutt, I know why I was saved from that
war. I wasn't born to thrive in division, the World of Duality we live in; I

was born to teach others about unity. The concept of reconciling opposites
was embedded in me from birth and my name, Neven Paar, is a testament to
it. While I recognize my first name representing the Five Elements, the two
masculine, active Elements reconciled by the Spirit (the symbolic V) with
the two feminine, passive Elements, my last name means "pair" in German,
concerning duality.
You see, I am a descendant of the Von Paar family line who were
Counts in the Austro-Hungarian Empire hundreds of years back. However,
my kingdom now is of a Spiritual nature, the Kingdom of Heaven, and one
that every human being is privy to, not just the select few. Having
experienced a Kundalini awakening and knowing that every human has this
mechanism inside them, I see us all as Children of the Light, the Kings and
Queens of the Spiritual domain. Some, like myself, are realized, while
others are still in a state of potential. Regardless, all can unleash this power
within themselves and enflame their Being with the inner Light, thereby
establishing their Spiritual Kingdom on Earth.
This, I believe, is my purpose on this Planet. To unite the people
through my experiences and teachings and make them see beyond their
religion and race; to enable others to know that we are all the same. We are
all built the same, with the same framework and features, and our physical
differences do not change our constitution in any way. We have the same
Father and Mother and are united through love energy as brothers and
sisters.
For this reason, I work as hard as I do daily with relentless intensity. I
don't know why I feel compelled to fulfil this mission, nor do I see the endgoal, but I know I live my purpose. I am honouring the Divine Voice that
saved my family's lives almost thirty years ago and all those people who
died in my country due to the ignorance and darkness that can overtake
people's hearts and minds.
Although I laid the groundwork for this book earlier, I continued
working on it during the Covid pandemic, which started in December 2019,
right when my first book came out. About 30% of this book is knowledge I
acquired on my seventeen-year journey with the Kundalini, while the other
70% is based on rigorous, daily research and contemplation. Therefore,
some parts of the invisible science of the human energy system I am
presenting here are a work in progress that I will surely update for many
years to come.

During this two-year project, I added at least 100 new books to my
already massive home library to ensure the most comprehensive exposition
of every subject, with no shortcuts taken. So, saying that I poured my heart
and Soul into this book is an understatement. And, as much as it will be a
journey of learning for you, the reader, it was quite the ride for me as well.
I want to thank the love of my life, my wife and muse Emily, for not
only doing the cover art for Serpent Rising but for being my model and
putting up with my tireless requests for impromptu photoshoots. I also want
to thank Daniel Bakov, my creative consultant and editor of Man of Light,
who helped me find the right words to introduce myself in a worthy and
epic fashion. Also, a thank you to my fellow Kundalions, Michael
"Omdevaji" Perring and Joel Chico. Michael gave me plenty of insights into
the vast and intricate subject of Tantra and Yoga, while Joel and I compared
notes on the role cannabis can play in the Kundalini awakening process.
And lastly, a most gracious thank you to my sister and parents for giving me
the greatest gift of all, that of a loving and supportive family that never left
me wanting or needing more.
In closing, thank you, dear reader, for deciding to join me for this
journey as I examine the Kundalini energy, its evolving science, and the
philosophical framework behind how it operates. I am confident that you
will benefit greatly from my knowledge and experience and that this book
will answer many of the questions you may have. As such, your Spiritual
Evolution will be furthered, which is the goal of all my work. For more
information about me and the work I have been undertaking since
awakening the Kundalini seventeen years ago, please visit my website at
www.nevenpaar.com.
Fiat Lux,

Neven Paar

"A man will be charged with destroying the temple and
religions altered by fantasy. He will harm the rocks
rather than the living. Ears filled with ornate speeches."
"…He will fly through the sky, the rains and the snows,
And strike everyone with his rod."
He will appear in Asia, at home in Europe.
One who is issued from great Hermes…"
"…At the eve of another desolation when the perverted
church is atop her most high and sublime dignity…
there will proceed one born from a branch long barren,
who will deliver the people of the world from a meek and
voluntary slavery and place them under the protection of Mars."
"…The flame of a sect shall spread the world over…"
—Nostradamus

PART I:
KUNDALINI
AWAKENING

INTRODUCTION TO THE KUNDALINI
Kundalini is the greatest secret known to man, yet few people
understand what it really is. Most people think it is a type of Yoga instead of
the aim of all Yoga. Some people even dare say it is a type of pasta.
Regardless, from my experience of talking to random folks on the subject,
strangers, even ones who claim they read many books on the Kundalini and
know what it's all about, they only know about 30% of the story. And I am
being generous with that number. This book, however, will change all that.
I stated inside the front cover that Serpent Rising is the "The World's
Most Comprehensive Body of Work on Human Energy Potential," and I
meant it. It wasn't the Ego talking. I believe this statement is a fact. And I
think that by the time you are finished reading this book, you will agree.
Keep in mind that Serpent Rising: The Kundalini Compendium is Part I of
the series. I am already well underway on Part II, which examines Ancient
civilizations and traditions and the role that the Kundalini played in their
systems of Spiritual Evolution. Also, my previous book, The Magus:
Kundalini and the Golden Dawn, although not a direct part of the series,
contains a plethora of information on the Kundalini from a Western
Mysteries perspective, including the Qabalah and the Tree of Life, whose
knowledge is essential to understanding the wisdom teachings.
Knowledge of the Kundalini has existed since time immemorial. I am
talking about the deep understanding of Kundalini's ultimate potential from
people that have gone all the way on their journey of Spiritual awakening.
The Ancients hid the secrets of the Kundalini in the symbolism of their
mystery traditions, usually conveyed through art and sculpture. This
knowledge mainly was kept hidden, reserved for the chosen few and veiled
from the profane, as was the Ancient method of passing on the esoteric
mysteries. The teacher taught the student from mouth to ear. This
information was not written down until recently, and even then, you had to
have been initiated into a mystery school to get the real secrets.
Over time, individuals came along with claims that something
extraordinary happened to them—God touched them, they said. These
unique people awakened the Kundalini, usually by accident, so they used the
most familiar language to explain this metaphysical event. They would often
be regarded as mystics, or prophets even, displaying supernatural powers

that astonished the masses. In their attempts to describe their experience,
they referred to the Kundalini by many names—the "Dragon Force," the
"Serpent Power," the "Holy Fire," and other variations of these Archetypes.
But as time went on and more people became awakened, it created
more confusion than clarity regarding this subject. And the answer to this is
simple. There has never been a powerful enough work of reference that
unified all the Ancient traditions, philosophies, and religions regarding the
Kundalini. The schools of Yoga and Tantra, which hold the most
comprehensive keys on the Kundalini and the process of its awakening, are
only one piece of the puzzle, albeit the largest one since the Kundalini
science originated from them.
This brings me to why I wrote this book. I wrote it partly out of
necessity and partly out of personal desire. I wanted to give humanity the
keys to understanding this most cryptic and elusive of subjects. Serpent
Rising: The Kundalini Compendium features a scientific approach to the
Kundalini that includes the study of its energetic framework and so much
more, using simplified language that is understandable to the everyday
person—a language that unites the Eastern and Western schools of thought
regarding Spirituality.
While writing this book, my Higher Self led me to research one subject
to another, avoiding all shortcuts as I connected the dots and created the
work you are holding in your hands. In the end, although my name is on
Serpent Rising, this work transcends me as a person. I was merely a conduit
for my Spiritual Self to channel this knowledge to me. By the time you
finish reading it, you will understand everything you need regarding the
subject of the Kundalini. And that was the point—that's why it took me so
long to do this. To equip you with the necessary knowledge to inform others
about the Kundalini so that the whole world may know its power and
ultimate potential, and we can collectively evolve Spiritually.
You see, Kundalini is the most critical esoteric topic in the world. When
it comes to Spiritual evolution, its exploration is of utmost importance. A
Kundalini awakening allows one to realize their full Spiritual potential.
There are many components to one's energy system, which I will discuss in
great detail in this book, including how the Kundalini impacts each part. The
Kundalini awakening process unfolds systematically over time, involving a
necessary and often challenging period of intense purification that can be
rather meticulous. Beyond the awakening and purification process itself, a

more significant challenge consists in learning to live and operate with the
Kundalini energy daily and controlling it instead of being controlled by it
since it can be very volatile.
I will discuss the many different aspects of how the Kundalini
transformation unfolds and affects one's life in the aftermath and clear up
many of the common misunderstandings about the Kundalini and the
awakening process itself. My seventeen years of experience of living with an
awakened Kundalini is invaluable to someone in the midst of their journey
and is seeking guidance.
Next, I will share valuable information on the different types of
Kundalini awakenings and the transfiguration process, and its general
timeline. There are common challenges along the way that I will discuss, as
well as tips and insight into troubleshooting the Kundalini circuit when
things seem to "break down." This last section includes effective practices
and meditations in or around the head area to "kick-start" or re-align Ida and
Pingala channels necessary for the engine to run smoothly. You won't find
this crucial information anywhere else. Since my awakening, I have been the
scientist and laboratory in one. As such, my creativity, courage, and
persistence have led me to find unconventional solutions to the many
challenges I have been faced with along the way. And there were many.
There is a myriad of other topics on the Kundalini that I will get into to
further your knowledge of the subject and to enlighten and reconcile the
many differing viewpoints you may have. From how human anatomy is
involved in the Kundalini awakening process to various Spiritual healing
practices and an in-depth study of the science and practice of Yoga with
components of Ayurveda. I tried to cover every subject I believed was
relevant for you to know about that gives insight into the Kundalini and how
to heal your Chakras once you've had the awakening. My desire to be the
best at what I do, the Michael Jordan of the Kundalini science, if you will,
pushes me every day to expand my knowledge as I continue developing
myself into the foremost authority on this subject. Consider it my life's
mission, one that I devote all of my time to.
As a final note, since this is a rather large book, I don't want you to feel
intimidated by its size, thinking you need to read through everything
sequentially. The Yoga and Spiritual healing practices sections, for example,
can be saved for last if you wish to read specifically about the Kundalini and
the awakening and transformation process. Then, when you're ready to delve

into working with the exercises to heal your Chakras and balance your inner
energies, you will have all the tools to do so.
The path of the Kundalini initiate is the path of the Spiritual warrior. A
warrior needs the proper equipment, training, and insight to succeed. With
these teachings, I intend to equip you, the initiate, with the necessary
understanding of the human energy potential so that you may attain success
on your Soul's evolution journey. Though the Kundalini awakening and
transformation path is difficult, it is also rewarding beyond measure. Let us
begin.

Kundalini Awakening Process
The Kundalini is evolutionary energy at the base of the spine (in the
coccyx region) that is said to be coiled three and a half times in its state of
potential in unawakened humans. The word "Kundalini" is of Eastern origin,
namely Yoga and Tantra. In Sanskrit, Kundalini means "coiled snake."
Once awakened, the Kundalini rises up the spinal column through the
three main Nadis, all the way to the top of the head. The term "Nadi" is a
Sanskrit word that translates as "tube," "channel," or "flow." Simply put,
Nadis are channels that carry energy in the body.

Figure 1: Kundalini Rising and the Chakras
In Chinese medicine, the Nadis are known as Meridians. The main
difference between the two systems is that the Nadis are not defined in the
limbs, only the head and central trunk, unlike the Meridians. In Serpent
Rising, we will stick to the Yogic science and philosophy of the Nadis and
Chakras, coupled with the Transpersonal Chakras model and many of my
discoveries regarding the Body of Light's energy centres and energy flow.

The central Nadi is called Sushumna. It is essentially the hollow tube of
the spinal column. Intertwining around Sushumna are two ancillary, or
supplementary Nadis, Ida and Pingala. Ida is the feminine, Moon Nadi,
which regulates cold in the body, while Pingala is the masculine, Sun Nadi,
which controls heat in the body. These two Nadis represent the masculine
and feminine principles contained within all things in the Universe. In
Sanskrit, the Ida and Pingala channels are often referred to as the Chandra
(Moon) and Surya (Sun) Nadis.
During a Kundalini awakening, as the energy rises simultaneously
through the three main Nadis, it systematically blows open the Chakras from
the root of the spine upward to the brain centre (Figure 1). Ida and Pingala
meet at these Chakric points and terminate in Ajna Chakra. The Kundalini
will continue rising upwards to the centre, top of the head, breaking the
"Cosmic Egg," which fully activates the Body of Light—the Holographic
Body. In Tantric philosophy, the Cosmic Egg relates to the Brahmarandhra.
(More on this subject in a later chapter.) The Cosmic Egg is a container that
holds the Ambrosia nectar. Once the Kundalini energy pierces through it on
its upwards rise, this Ambrosia is released, infusing the Seventy-Two
Thousand Nadis, which refers to the Body of Light activation. This part of
the process feels like someone cracked an egg over your head and the yolk
(Ambrosia) pours all the way down to your feet, covering and enveloping
your entire body.
Although the Body of Light activation feels as if the physical body is
being electrically charged, the released Ambrosia is only working on a subtle
level. However, the person experiencing this event feels like a human battery
being charged and infinitely expanded by a current of bioelectricity. For
example, every Kundalini awakened individual I have spoken to that has had
this experience describes feeling intensely "electrocuted" by the Kundalini
energy.
By activating the Body of Light, all the Subtle Bodies become
activated, including the Spiritual Body and Divine Body. There are, in fact,
numerous Subtle Bodies within the Body of Light. However, after a full
Kundalini awakening, it is essential to align the individual consciousness
solely with the Spiritual Body since it transcends the duality of the mind.
In my Kundalini awakening experience, once the Seventy-Two
Thousand Nadis were in the process of being charged and activated, I jolted
out of bed and opened my eyes. What I saw next changed my life forever.

Firstly, I witnessed firsthand that the Body of Light is not an idea or a
concept but a real, tangible thing. When I looked at my hands, I saw them
made of pure golden Light, beautiful to behold and perfect in every way.
Then, as I looked around my room, I saw the Holographic blueprint of the
world we live in. The room had what I describe as a digital makeover with
transparent, vapour-like walls and objects that appeared like they were
suspended in mid-air. The colours were sharper, deeper, and more reflective.
To clarify, what I saw was not a Mind's Eye vision inside my head, but I saw
this with my own two physical eyes.
You see, there is a component of the world that is transparent and made
of pure energy, occupying the same Time and Space as the Physical World,
just at a different degree of vibration—one closer to Spirit. The awakening
of the Kundalini and activation of the Body of Light is a process whereby
the consciousness becomes able to perceive and experience this reality.
Another name for this reality is the Fourth Dimension—the Dimension of
Vibration or energy. Since all things in existence are held in vibratory
motion, this dimension is the realm where each object, thought, or emotion
has a quantifiable essence. It can be perceived by the Mind's Eye and the
intuitive faculty of a human being.
Once the Light Body activation is complete, the experience does not
end there. Instead, the Kundalini energy continues to rise upwards. The next
step in the awakening process is the energy leaving the body altogether,
through the Crown, taking the individual consciousness with it. This
experience results in the momentary unification of the individual
consciousness with the Cosmic Consciousness, the Fifth Dimensional White
Light principle —the source of Divinity. Once this transcendental experience
occurs, the individual consciousness re-enters the physical body, having seen
the vision of the true nature of reality. Thus, the human becomes One with
God for a brief moment, only to come back down and tell their story.
Alternatively, if the awakened individual becomes fearful of uniting
their Being with the White Light, the Kundalini energy subsides and drops
back down to the Root Chakra, Muladhara. After all, it is common for
people who experience a spontaneous Kundalini awakening to become
fearful during the activation process. It makes them feel like they are
undergoing a physical death due to the intensity of the energy felt in the
body and consciousness being liberated from it.

Activating The Body of Light
The Kundalini energy's goal is to activate the Body of Light and the
corresponding Subtle Bodies. Once this occurs, the entire Tree of Life is
awakened within the individual, and all the Cosmic Planes become available
as states of consciousness. Since the Body of Light is the vehicle of the Soul,
once it is fully activated, the Soul is permanently freed from the physical
body. Thus, over time, the Soul must align with the Spiritual Body of the
Spiritual Plane, where the Soul and Spirit become one.
Of all the Subtle Bodies, the Spiritual Body is most important since,
once your consciousness aligns with it, your Soul elevates past pain and
suffering. A person who can achieve such a feat permanently rises above
their Wheel of Karma. Karma is still operational since one can never escape
its effects. Still, they are no longer emotionally affected by the energy of fear
that the mind experiences due to living in a world of Duality.
The Body of Light is the next vehicle of consciousness in the process of
human evolution as it allows one to perceive and fully experience the inner
Cosmic Planes. However, the Spiritual Body is the transcendental sheath or
layer we are trying to align with to be our vehicle of consciousness while
living in the waking reality of the material world. It is the Causal Body of
the Eastern System—Anandamaya Kosha. It is inextricably connected to the
Body of Light as its highest expression our consciousness can embody in a
while living in the flesh. However, there is still one sheath higher, the Divine
Body, although we cannot sustain its experience for an extended period
during our waking life unless we are in deep meditation.
The Body of Light is the vehicle of consciousness for the Soul when it
enters the Inner Planes during meditation and sleep. The Inner Planes are
experienced through the Mind's Eye (Ajna Chakra), one of the three
Spiritual Chakras concerned with intuition and clairvoyance. The most
prominent Inner Plane experiences occur during Lucid Dreams, enabling you
to be conscious when you dream and control your dreams' content. It also
allows you to explore the inner Cosmic Planes during dream states and have
incredible Soul experiences you can't duplicate in real life. Lucid Dreaming
basically lets you experience anything you ever desired, without the
consequences. It is one of the more significant Spiritual gifts received on the
Kundalini awakening journey and one that I will discuss in more detail later
on in the book.

Figure 2: The Three Nadis Post-Kundalini Awakening

Once the activation is complete, the Kundalini energy becomes a
permanent part of the awakened individual's existence, signalling a new way
of functioning and experiencing the world. The Kundalini, over time,
becomes a self-sustaining energy circuit (Figure 2) fueled by food and water
that grows and gets stronger, expanding the individual consciousness daily.
And as the normal waking consciousness slowly aligns to the Spiritual Body,
which is a process that may take many years, the awakened individual will
be living in the same reality as everyone else but experiencing it entirely
differently. This experience of life is a true gift from the Divine.

Spiritual Gifts and Sense Upgrades
After the awakening, every morsel of food transforms into Pranic (Life
Force) energy which powers the Kundalini circuit and expands the
consciousness, giving rise to many types of transcendental experiences and
the dawning of new psychic abilities. Thus, the awakened individual now
begins to function at a new level of life experience, within the Dimension of
Vibration or energy. In this new dimension, they develop an ability to feel
the world around them as a quantifiable essence.
Over time, this newly developed ability to feel the world through
energy becomes the dominant way of navigating through life, causing a
disregard for the rational, thinking mind. Finally, the awakened individual
starts to experience the world entirely through intuition as a primary mode of
functioning since they are in direct contact with the Inner Light and the
Truth. Illusion goes away as their consciousness aligns with the Spiritual
Body over time.
As illusion (Maya) vanishes, the Ego dissipates as well, since it belongs
to the realm of the rational, thinking mind. Its impulse becomes less and less
active until the awakened individual can fully function on intuition through
the Fourth Dimension of Vibration, or energy. By doing so, they become
attuned to the most precious gift that the Divine has given humanity, which
is the present moment, the "Now", a "present" from God. In the "Now," they
are tapped into a field of all possibility, enabling them to reshape their own
lives to maximize their highest potential. Truly successful and happy people
all have one thing in common—they all live in the "Now".
The perceptive abilities of the awakened individual, the five senses of
sight, smell, sound, taste, and touch, are upgraded through the Kundalini
energy. Smelling and hearing things at a distance become an everyday part

of their lives. They can taste something and feel it by merely observing that
thing with their eyes. Through the power of their minds, they can feel the
energy of objects before them and use all of their inner senses. This is
because Ajna Chakra is now open permanently through which these
transcendental experiences occur. Reality is perceived now at a much higher
level than ever before.
I saved the sense of sight for last because the upgrade received is the
most amazing in my experience. Once the inner Light is awakened through
the Kundalini energy, it reshapes everything one sees and perceives visually,
giving it a complete makeover. Moreover, the outside world appears like it is
inside your head, being projected onto a movie screen before your eyes
(Figure 3). I like to use the analogy of the progression of video game
technology to explain this visual phenomenon since it is the only reference
point that I can come up with that people can relate to.
If you have ever played the early generation of video games (like I did
since I grew up in the 90s), remember how the game world was drastically
upgraded as we went from the PlayStation 2 to the PlayStation 3 console?
The graphics became sharper, crisper, more refined. Now imagine what
would happen if you went straight from the Playstation 2 to the Playstation 5
console while playing the same game. The characters and environments of
your game are the same, but the radical digital makeover brings the game to
life in a whole new way.

Figure 3: The Universe Inside the Head
To specify, however, this visual perception upgrade is least common in
Kundalini awakened individuals, but it is the most significant "wow" factor
that I have experienced in my awakening process. As such, my account
serves as a testament to its reality. In fact, it is so rare that out of dozens of
Kundalini awakened individuals I have spoken to about their "upgrades,"
only one or two had this particular one.
But then again, I haven't come across anyone who witnessed the
Holographic nature of reality with their own two eyes either. I believe that
my upgraded sense of sight is a sustained version of this same reality.
Interestingly, the Holographic Universe theory is not a new concept but is
supported by prominent Astrophysicists in modern times. Some have taken
this idea further, stating that we may even live in a computer simulation.
Elon Musk, the 21 century's real-life Tony Stark (Iron Man), a genius of our
modern age, once said that how technology is progressing, there is a one in a
billion chance that we are NOT living in a computer simulation right now.

Although I cannot say for sure whether we are living in a computer
simulation, the world does have a Holographic blueprint that is
imperceptible to most people that I would best describe as pure
consciousness. Whether this pure consciousness is a projected Hologram is
uncertain, but the possibility is very much there.
However, what I do know for a fact is that the world I experience now
appears as a digitized version of the world I lived in before but with more
enhanced graphics. Witnessing the downtown of a big city like Toronto at
night, for example, with its LED signage, bright lights, and flashing colours,
is like stepping into a futuristic video game wonderland—a breathtaking
experience to this day.
The two words that best describe how I see the external world now are
"Interstellar" and "Intergalactic," since these words inspire the idea that our
Planet is just one of many with life in the vastness of space. There are
countless other worlds that we will explore in due time and make contact
with Beings unimaginable to us. However, we must first strip away our
material sheath via the Kundalini mechanism that our Creator put inside us
to see reality's hidden, Holographic nature and experience our true essence
as Beings of Light.

THE TREE OF LIFE AND THE
CHAKRAS
In my first book, The Magus: Kundalini and the Golden Dawn, I
discuss at great length the Western Mystery Tradition and their relation to
the Eastern Spiritual system. In this book, however, since our main subject is
the Kundalini (an Eastern term), I will take the converse approach, primarily
holding to the Yogic and Tantric systems while referencing the Qabalah and
the Tree of life in some instances.
The Tree of Life, the main component of the Qabalah, is the blueprint
of existence. It is the map of our Solar System and the human psyche. The
Tree of Life consists of ten Sephiroth (Spheres), representing states of
consciousness that humans partake of daily that give rise to inner faculties
such as intuition, memory, willpower, imagination, emotion, desire, logic
and reason, and thought. Qabalists say that everything in nature can be
categorized on the Tree of Life since all things relate in some way to our
Solar System and its energies.
The Qabalistic system relies on the energy of numbers, symbols, and
letters (Hebrew). The ten Sephiroth are connected by twenty-two paths,
corresponding with the twenty-two Major Arcana of the Tarot and the
twenty-two Hebrew Letters. These, in turn, correspond with the Five
Elements, Twelve Zodiac, and Seven Ancient Planets. As such, the Tree of
Life encompasses the totality of the Universal energies, including
Constellations, that impact life on Earth.
The Qabalah that I have extensive experience with is Hermetic, which
is why it is spelt with a "Q." Hermeticism is the study of our Solar System
and the Universal energies that comprise who we are. In addition, there is a
Jewish Kabbalah (with a K) and a Christian Cabala (with a C)—all three
systems have the same foundation, however, since they use the Tree of Life
as their central glyph. Consult the "Glossary of Selected Terms" in the
Appendix for a detailed description of each of the Sephiroth of the Tree of
Life and other relevant Western Mysteries terms undefined in the main body
of text.

The Chakras originated in Ancient India. They were first mentioned in
the Hindu Vedas (1500-1200 BC), a large body of sacred texts containing
Spiritual knowledge. The Chakras are part of a complex energy system that
describes different aspects or parts of the human Aura (energy field).
Knowledge of Chakras has only recently been brought to the Western world,
with the growth in popularity of Yoga and as part of New Age philosophies
in general.
Human beings have Major Chakras as well as Minor Chakras.
However, the Seven Major Chakras are the primary ones that essentially
power the Aura. The Minor Chakras are connected to the Major ones and do
not function independently but instead work to carry out their duties further.
In this book, I will cover both the Major and Minor Chakras and the
Transpersonal Chakras.
Chakra is a Sanskrit word for "spinning wheel" or "vortex." The term
"Chakra" is used to describe the invisible energy centres along the spinal
column and within the head. These energy centres are comprised of multicoloured flowing energy that we find in the Aura. The Chakras power the
Aura and regulate the nervous system, endocrine glands, and major organs.
They are central energy stations that govern the entire human being; mind,
body, and Soul.
The Chakras manage and distribute Life energy throughout our various
Subtle Bodies, which are vehicles of consciousness for the multiple Cosmic
Planes of existence that we partake in. Chakras are conductors of energy, and
each Chakra has different properties, which powers and expresses our inner
Self. They are responsible for the work of our thoughts, emotions,
willpower, intuition, memory, and other components which make up who we
are.
It is essential to understand that Chakras are not physical; instead, they
are located in the Body of Light. They represent forces coming from the
Subtle Bodies that manifest in a circulating pattern in seven major areas of
the Body of Light. Chakras are often described as being shaped like flowers
in full blossom. Each Chakric flower has a specific number of petals that
create wheel-like vortexes of energy that radiate outwards, in right
horizontal angles, while the top and bottom Chakra (Sahasrara and
Muladhara) project vertically. To further add to their flower-like appearance,
each Chakra also has a stem-like channel that projects within and connects to
the spinal cord and brainstem.

The Chakras can spin clockwise or counter-clockwise, depending on
the Gender of the Chakra and whether it is giving out or receiving energy.
The rate of a Chakra's spin determines the quality of its function. If the spin
is fast, they are well-tuned, channelling more Light energy. If their spin is
slow and stagnant, they are out of tune, meaning they channel less Light
energy. In general, people whose Chakras are out of tune are aligned more
with their Ego than their Soul. To align with the Soul and express its
properties, one needs to have well-tuned Chakras since Soul expression
depends entirely on how much Light is channelled through the Chakras.
Once the Kundalini has risen to the top of the head to be permanently
localized in the brain, the entire Tree of Life becomes fully activated. The
highest Sephira is called Kether, the Crown, at the top of the Tree of Life.
Kether corresponds with the seventh Chakra, Sahasrara. Both are called the
"Crown," concerning their placement on top of the head. Kether relates to
the Spiritual White Light that underlies all of physical existence.
Conversely, the lowest Sephira is called Malkuth, the Planet Earth, as
the tenth Sephira on the Tree of Life—directly opposite to Kether. On the
Chakric system, Malkuth relates to the first Chakra, Muladhara, and the
Earth Element. These two sets of Sephiroth and Chakras have direct
correspondence and relations, although Malkuth is placed at the feet while
Muladhara is placed in the groin region. The rest of the Tree of Life
Sephiroth and Chakras correspond as well, although one must have direct
experience with both systems to see how they relate. Thus, it is not as simple
as unifying the opposite Spheres on the Tree of Life to get the seven
Chakras, although this method works mathematically.

Figure 4: The Tree of Life/Seven Chakras/Kundalini
After a full Kundalini awakening, the Chakras (and Tree of Life
Sephiroth) become permanently infused with Light energy, activating their
states of consciousness within the individual (Figure 4). The Chakras
become like light bulbs, which emit Light respective to how clean, pure, and

in-tune they are. For example, if there is a lot of Karma in a particular
Chakra, it emits a dim Light rather than a bright one. It is the solemn duty
you owe to your Creator to cleanse your Chakras and remove negativity
from each so that they can shine brightly, allowing you to align your
consciousness with your Soul.

Purifying the Chakras
Karma is a Sanskrit word for "action," "work," or "deed" that forms
part of the Universal Law. It implies that every action is the effect of one or
more previous actions and will cause one or more future actions. Thus,
Karma is cyclic, and it affects us all. Since reality moves in cycles like a
revolving wheel, the Wheel of Karma represents good or bad Karmic energy
in our life that will manifest in the future either as blessings or issues that
need to be resolved. Our behaviour in life determines whether we have good
or bad Karma and that behaviour is expressed through the Chakras.
Each Chakra is a power source for how your character and personality
express themselves in the inner and outer worlds. Character is inherent in
you as it is the essence of who you are, while personality changes over time.
Character is your higher, ethical beliefs and expressions of your Soul, while
personality deals more with Ego expressions and its likes and dislikes. Each
Chakra is a power reservoir for different parts of your character and
personality, from how you think to what you feel to what drives you and
beyond.
When you have Karmic energy in a Chakra, part of the Self carries
negative energy, which will need to be worked through. Therefore, all the
Chakras need to be cleansed and optimised so that your thoughts, emotions,
and actions can come from a place of love. If they are imbued with love
energy, you are enlightening the Chakra of that expression of Self.
Therefore, if you are selfish, fearful, lustful, angry, arrogant, greedy, selfrighteous, and so on, then that means that you need to work on those parts of
Self and turn them into their loving, positive opposites. It means that you
need to overcome the Karma of those Chakras that express this behaviour.
Karmic energy present in a Chakra can be a very challenging
experience. It makes life very uncomfortable, preventing you from
functioning as well as you should, or want to. For the Kundalini awakened
individuals, those unprepared for the experience as I was, Karmic energy in
the Chakras can bring on debilitating fear and anxiety.

A full awakening localises the Kundalini energy in the brain
permanently, uniting the conscious and subconscious minds. If there is
dormant negative energy present in the Chakras, it will flood the
consciousness in the form of unpleasant thoughts and emotions. One can't
hide from their Demons (negative thought-senders) anymore after the
Kundalini enters the brain resulting in a resurgence of harmful viewpoints,
beliefs, and attitudes toward life that will have to be overcome. Therefore,
you must purge fear energy from your system, which starts with cleansing
the Chakras.
Through Chakric purification, you alter your beliefs about yourself and
the world. After all, if you are to experience the Divine Light within you, a
complete transformation of your character and personality is necessary. You
must become a Spiritual Being whose consciousness is higher in vibration
than before. There is no way around this. And to accomplish this, your Ego
must die and be reborn. This is the ultimate Rebirth concept alluded to by
many religions, new and old. However, it is more than an idea for the
Kundalini awakened people—it is the only reality they need to concern
themselves with until the process is complete.
Kundalini awakened individuals have to learn who they are deep inside,
the good and the bad, and accept and love themselves. And once they go
within, they can bypass the Ego and get in touch with their real Self, the
Higher Self of the Spirit. But to do so, they must build virtues, remove vices,
and adapt moral and ethical behaviours into their lives if they are to
overcome the fear and anxiety that is hampering their very existence.
So you see, the gift of the Kundalini can be seen as a curse at first if
you had a spontaneous awakening and were Karmically unprepared.
However, there is no shortcut to Enlightenment, and once the genie is out of
the bottle, there is no putting it back in again. The Kundalini rapidly
accelerates your Spiritual Evolution journey, but to raise the vibration of
your consciousness, you must overcome the negative energy stored within
each Chakra. It is a systematic process, starting from the lowest Chakra,
Muladhara, and finishing with Sahasrara at the Crown. Since the Ego is
present within the physical body, which is the densest part of you, you need
to start there and begin peeling away layers of your consciousness, each of
which is less dense than the one that came before. When you get to the final
layer, you have found your Philosopher's Stone, the Quintessence, and have
reached the Higher Self of the Spiritual Plane.

The process towards Enlightenment is alluded to by the story of the
crucifixion of Jesus Christ. Once he died on the cross, instead of being
Resurrected (Enlightened) right away, he had to spend three days in the
Underworld, the Demonic realm, to become the King of Hell before
becoming the King of Heaven. So here is a metaphor for Jesus having to
master his Demons since they barred the path towards Enlightenment. And
he did so by facing them without fear in his heart, which allowed him to
assume mastery over them.
So you see, when you approach your inner Demons with courage
instead of fear, you automatically take away their fuel since they feed on fear
energy; it is their sustenance. Then you can master them and give them back
their wings, metaphorically speaking. Thus, all Demons are essentially
unmastered Angels. They can all be used for good if the mind is strong and
the individual learns how to wield their powers. For to maximise our
willpower, we must master our dark side. In fact, before reaching Heaven,
the Spiritual Realm, this is a prerequisite. Let those with ears of
understanding hear this great mystery of Life, Death, and Resurrection. It
has been hinted at in many Ancient Spiritual traditions before the advent of
Christianity.

SPIRITUAL HEALING PRACTICES
The journey towards Spiritual Rebirth is filled with mental and
emotional trials and tribulations that can often be gruelling. Regardless, to
rise in consciousness, one must overcome the negative energies stored in
the Chakras and "enlighten" them before experiencing the ineffable beauty
of the Crown Chakra, Sahasrara. Cleansing the Chakras is inevitable and
whether you have chosen to work with them through a Spiritual healing
practice or allow the Kundalini to purify each Chakra systematically over
time is totally up to you.
Spiritual healing practices include, but are not limited to, Ceremonial
Magick, Gemstones (Crystals), Tuning Forks, Aromatherapy, Tattvas, and
Yogic and Tantric practices such as Asana, Pranayama, Mudra, Mantra, and
meditation (Dhyana). As someone who has tried most Spiritual healing
practices, I have found that Ceremonial Magick isolates each Chakra best
and allows you to overcome the Karmic energy in each and tune the
Chakra. My first book, The Magus: Kundalini and the Golden Dawn, is an
entire course of study for the aspiring Magi, and it gives you all the ritual
exercises you need to work with your Chakras.
While Ceremonial Magick is a Western Spiritual practice, Yoga and
Tantra are Eastern practices. However, people in both the East and the West
practise Crystal Healing, Sound Healing with Tuning Forks, and
Aromatherapy. Although initially an Eastern Spiritual technique used in the
Yogic system, Tattvas have found their way into the Western Mystery
Schools because of their potency to connect with the Five Elements, the
unifying factor between the Eastern Chakric System and Western Qabalistic
system.
Since the purpose of this book is not only to give answers pertaining to
the Kundalini but also to offer alternate methods of healing the Aura and
the Chakras with the aim of Spiritual Evolution, I have devoted the entirety
of Part V and Part VI to the practices mentioned above. I will briefly go
through some of them to give you an overall impression. Of course, there
are other methods of working with the Chakras, and I am only mentioning
the major ones that I have extensive experience with. In the end, what you
choose to work with is up to you.

Gemstones (Crystals)
The use of Gemstones, otherwise called Natural Stones, or Crystals, is
a powerful Spiritual practice that has existed for thousands of years and is
widely used by energy healers today. We find evidence of the use of
Gemstones for Spiritual healing, energy manipulation, and protection in
virtually all Ancient cultures and traditions. For example, the Ancients
incorporated Gemstones into jewellery, cosmetics, decorative statues, and
talismans as a testament to their powerful ability to heal mental, emotional,
and physical issues while protecting them from adverse forces.
Each of the hundreds of Gemstones in existence has a broad spectrum
of healing properties. We can use Gemstones to target the corresponding
energy centres in the Body of Light to remove blockages and increase
energy flow in these zones. By tuning and optimising the Chakras through
Crystal Healing, the corresponding Subtle Bodies, including the physical
body, become rejuvenated as well—As Above, So Below.
To truly understand how a Gemstone affects one on the physical,
emotional, mental, and Spiritual levels, it is necessary to get some personal
experience with each stone. After all, each Gemstone relates to a Chakra or
Chakras but also different Elements, Planets, and Zodiacal energies.
Therefore, the use of Gemstones is a viable practice to work on your
Microcosm, your Aura, and one that can balance your energies and heal you
on all levels if you devote yourself to it. I have included a list of Gemstone
correspondences in this work, including techniques you can use to work
with them.
Tuning Forks
Using Tuning Forks in Sound Healing is a relatively new field,
although it has grown in popularity because of its therapeutic effectiveness.
It is based on the principle that everything in the Universe is in a state of
vibration, including our thoughts, emotions, and physical body.
When the practitioner strikes a Tuning Fork in a healing session, they
create a sound wave whose vibration travels deeply into the patient's Aura,
accessing their Body of Light's energy pathways (Nadis) and affecting the
consciousness. There are many uses for Tuning Forks, including healing the
subtle energy system, adjusting the body's natural cycles, balancing the
nervous system, relaxing the muscles, and promoting good sleep.

The most popular Tuning Forks on the market are the ones that
correspond with the Major Chakras. Since each Chakra vibrates at a
specific frequency when healthy, a Tuning Fork can be calibrated to
resonate at that same frequency. When placed on or near the Chakra, the
Tuning Fork's vibration sends a sound wave that tunes the corresponding
Chakra, returning it to its optimal vibratory state. The process of allowing
two oscillating bodies to synchronize with each other when they are near
one another is called "entrainment."
Aromatherapy
Aromatherapy is a holistic medicine that has also been around for
thousands of years, dating back to the time of Ancient Sumer. It uses
compounds extracted from plants that capture the plant's fragrance or scent
—its essence. The most commonly used plant extracts in Aromatherapy's
"essential" oils are generally inhaled through various means and methods,
although we can also use them topically.
When inhaled through the nose, essential oils impact the Limbic
System, the part of the brain that plays a role in emotions, behaviours, and
memories. In addition, the Limbic System produces hormones that help
regulate breathing, heart rate, respiration, and blood pressure. For this
reason, many essential oils have a calming effect on the nervous system,
making them beneficial as a precursor to meditation, Tuning Fork Therapy,
Tantric and Yogic practices, and other Spiritual healing modalities that
require relaxation. Conversely, some essential oils have an energizing,
uplifting effect and are great energy boosters when feeling sluggish and
depleted.
Each essential oil fragrance has specific vibrations with healing
properties that positively impact our consciousness. Their use can remove
energy blockages in the Aura while realigning the Subtle Bodies and
recalibrating the Chakras. In addition, essential oils make excellent
companions to Gemstones and other energy invoking tools. They are
generally safe and easy to use and provide a different yet potent method to
heal the mind, body, and Soul.
Tattvas
Working with Tattvas is an Eastern practice that has been around for
over two-and-a-half thousand years. The very word "Tattva" is a Sanskrit

word meaning "essence," "principle," or "element." Tattvas represent the
Four Elements of Earth, Water, Air, Fire, and the fifth Element of Spirit.
There are five primary Tattvas, each of which has five Sub-Tattvas, making
a total of thirty.
Tattvas are best looked upon as "windows" into the Cosmic Planes,
corresponding to the Chakric energies. As such, they can assist us in
working with the Chakras and the Karmic energy contained therein. They
do not generate any energy in and of themselves, like Gemstones and
Tuning Forks, but they are helpful to zero in on the inner Cosmic Planes
and work on the corresponding Chakras. In my experience, working with
the Tattvas goes hand-in-hand with using Ceremonial Magick rituals of the
Elements since the type of energy each deals with are virtually the same.
Tattva work is similar to Ceremonial Magick as it does isolate each
Chakra, but the energy invoked is less potent. Some may prefer the Tattvas
method, though, since it allows one to work with the Sub-Elements safely
and efficiently. In addition, Tattvas can be used in tandem with other
Spiritual practices presented in this work, especially Aromatherapy.
Yoga and Tantra
The Eastern Spiritual systems of Yoga and Tantra contain many
exercises that can be practised individually or in unison with other
components of the two systems. Although Yoga and Tantra share the same
practices, their philosophies differ. While Yoga applies Spiritual techniques
to striving after particular goals and attainments (such as Self-Realisation or
Enlightenment), Tantra focuses on using the same methods to liberate
oneself from all desires, inevitably bringing about the same outcome as
Yoga. Thus, Tantra can be seen as an approach to Yoga. It originated as a
householder tradition that focused on embracing the material, mundane
world instead of transcending it, as is the aim of Yoga.
Asana is the practice of standing or sitting Yoga postures. There are
many benefits to performing Asanas, including toning the physical body,
developing flexibility and strength, balancing and harmonising our inner
energies, opening the Chakras, removing blockages in the Nadis, and
grounding us with the Earth. Asana practice also has a calming effect on the
mind, making it an excellent tool for combating anxiety and depression
while boosting the brain’s "happy" chemicals. Asanas are practised in
tandem with breathing exercises (Pranayama) and meditation (Dhyana).

Meditation Asanas, however, are a prerequisite for mostly all Yogic
practices, including Mudras and Mantras.
Pranayama is the Yogic practice of controlled breathing—bringing
Pranic energy into the body. We can practise it independently or as a
precursor to meditation and all energy invoking exercises. For example, the
"Four-Fold Breath" exercise from The Magus is an adapted Pranayama
technique that works well with the ritual exercises from the Western
Mystery Tradition. Similarly, Pranayama plays a crucial role in the
performance of Asanas, Mudras, and Mantras since breathing is the key to
controlling the mind and body. Pranayama exercises in this book are used
for various purposes, including balancing the feminine and masculine
energies, calming down the nervous system, neutralising negative energy,
and preparing the mind for raising and manipulating energy.
Mudras are symbolic, ritualistic gestures or poses that generally
involve only the hands and fingers, although they can also engage the entire
body. They enable us to manipulate energies in our bodies (Microcosm) and
invoke higher powers in the Universe (Macrocosm). Mudras connect us
with Archetypal forces and raise the vibration of our consciousness. This
book presents Mudras for awakening and fine-tuning the Chakras,
balancing the Elements, invoking peace of mind, and even harnessing
Pranic energy to awaken the Kundalini (Bandhas-Lock Mudras). You can
use Mudras with meditation exercises, Mantras, Pranayamas, and Asanas,
especially meditation Asanas.
Sanskrit Mantras invoke/evoke energy by attuning us to certain powers
in ourselves and our Solar System. They often involve the invocation of
Hindu or Buddhist Gods and Goddesses in some form or aspect of their
powers. This powerful method of inducing energy into the Aura has been
used for thousands of years by devotees of the Eastern Spiritual systems.
Mantras generally carry the Karmic energy of the systems respective to the
specific traditions or religions they originated from. They go hand-in-hand
with Pranayama techniques, meditation exercises, and other Yogic
practices. For example, since the energy invoked through Mantras usually
encompasses more than one Chakra, we can combine their use (especially
Bija Mantras) with Hand Mudras to efficiently isolate and heal individual
Chakras.
And finally, meditation, or Dhyana, is one of the most widely practised
disciplines for focusing the mind that we find in both the Eastern and

Western Spiritual systems. For example, in The Magus, the "Mind’s Eye
Meditation" is a precursor to energy invocations because it effectively
calms us down, facilitating an Alpha State of brain-wave activity, and
preparing the mind for ritual invocations/evocations. Meditation techniques
involve visualising an object within, concentrating on an object without, or
employing Mantras to help focus the mind. Meditation is meant to silence
the Ego and empty the mind, bringing healing to all the Chakras. It raises
our power of awareness, making us present here and now and allowing us
to tap into the field of pure potential. Meditation is used side-by-side with
breath control (Pranayama).

***
I have found that Kundalini awakened individuals who choose to allow
the Kundalini to work with individual Chakras naturally are often left at the
mercy of this energy which can be very harsh at times. The pain and anxiety
can be so high that some have lost complete control over their lives and
have contemplated suicide. Finding a Spiritual practice to heal the Chakras
allows you a significant level of control over this process, which can be
very uplifting and give you the confidence and strength to move ahead on
your journey. The Kundalini awakening process is a lifetime endeavour.
Therefore, it is essential to remain inspired as it is happening to get the most
from it and have the most comfortable time as you evolve Spiritually.

THE KUNDALINI TRANSFORMATION
It is imperative to discuss how the functioning of the Chakras ties in
with the brain, considering that the expansion of consciousness, which is
the primary purpose of the Kundalini awakening, occurs inside the head.
You see, by awakening the Seven Chakras and raising the Kundalini to the
Crown, new energy pathways open up within the brain, which feels like
your head becomes hollow on the inside. The brain undergoes a
remodelling process, expanding its capacity from 10%, which the average
human uses, to the complete 100%. Dormant areas of the brain become
unlocked, enabling us to take in a tremendous amount of outside
information all at once and process it. Think of this as a process of brainpower expansion.
Once the Cosmic Egg has blown open, activating the Body of Light, it
takes some time for Pranic/Light energy to infuse the Nadis and power up
the new energy system. This process is achieved through the process of
food transformation into Light energy via the digestive system. Since there
is no defined word for this process, I will use "sublimate" since it implies a
thing changing its form but not its essence. And since all things are made of
Spirit and Light, including the food we eat, sublimation refers to its
transformation from a solid state to a subtle one that infuses and powers up
the energy pathways in the Body of Light. This phenomenon is responsible
for not only the expansion of consciousness but for inducing transcendental
states.
However, you will not be able to fully attune to the Spiritual Body
(one of the Subtle Bodies of the Light Body) before you have completely
worked through the lower four Chakras and have integrated and mastered
the Elements of Earth, Water, Fire, and Air within your psyche. Since, to do
so, you must go beyond the Abyss, into the realm of Non-Duality. Thus,
during the lengthy Kundalini transformation process, your consciousness
begins slowly attuning to Chokmah and Binah, the second and third highest
Spheres (Sephiroth) on the Tree of Life that correspond with the inner
functions of wisdom and understanding.
In this book, I will be introducing you to certain Qabalistic Archetypes
and relating them to the Tree of Life. Although this work stands on its own,

many of the ideas presented here continue and expand the knowledge
presented in The Magus. After all, its description of the Kundalini energy
relates to the Western Mystery Tradition while Serpent Rising holds to the
Eastern system. By continually introducing new ideas and concepts to you,
I aim to build up your memory and learning ability so that your Higher Self
can take over and continue teaching you through Gnosis—the direct
communication with higher energies. Before this occurs, however, you must
have a thorough understanding of the Kundalini process and reconcile any
divergent viewpoints about this subject.

Bindu Activation
Once the Light in the body has been built up with food intake, which
may take three to four months after a full Kundalini awakening event, you
will feel a release valve being formed at the top back of the head, which is
the Bindu Chakra (Figure 5). Its location is exactly where Brahmins grow
their tuft of hair. Bindu is a Sanskrit term meaning "point" or "dot," and it is
the liberation access-point for the individual consciousness—the gateway to
"Shoonya," the state of Void or nothingness. However, for Bindu to unlock,
you must fully have awakened the Thousand-Petalled Lotus of Sahasrara,
and the Kundalini must reside in the brain now permanently. Also, a
sufficient amount of Chakric cleansing must be complete if the awakening
was a spontaneous and you were Karmically unprepared.
The Bindu's more common name is Bindu Visarga which means "the
falling of the drop" in Sanskrit, in reference to the Amrita nectar that Tantra
Yoga says discharges from the Bindu. The Amrita nectar, often called the
"Nectar of Immortality," secretes from Sahasrara, but it enters the body
through the Bindu. The Amrita and Ambrosia are the same thing and refer
to the "Food of the Gods," the "Elixir of Life" that you often hear about in
different Spiritual traditions. This nectar nourishes the Body of Light and is
said to prolong life, provide sustenance, and play a key role in experiencing
transcendence after a full and sustained Kundalini awakening.
In Tantra, the Bindu symbolizes Lord Shiva, the Source of Creation.
Because of its intrinsic property to reflect thoughts from the Cosmic
Consciousness, this Chakra is often referred to as the Moon Chakra. The
Bindu is considered one of the Transpersonal Chakras, so it is not
mentioned in most books on Yoga. In the Transpersonal Chakra model, the
Bindu is called the Causal Chakra. As I examined various Spiritual schools

of thought, I have found that the location of both Chakras and their
properties and characteristics are identical.
The Bindu Chakra plays a crucial function in the Kundalini
transformation process. This Chakra is next to awaken after Sahasrara. It
serves as a gateway or channel of energy for the two higher Transpersonal
Chakras, the Soul Star and the Stellar Gateway. After a full Kundalini
awakening, Prana/Light begins to channel through the newly activated
Body of Light. Over time, consciousness naturally gets pulled towards the
Bindu Chakra, unlocking it in the process. Simultaneously, the Seventh Eye
opens, whose auxiliary channel is crucial in sustaining the Kundalini circuit
and creating a transcendental mind state. (More on the Seventh Eye later
on.) One of Bindu's functions is to regulate the Light energy and distribute
it throughout the Body of Light. It acts as an energy transformer and
conductor. As this Light energy increases, your consciousness expands.

Figure 5: The Complete Kundalini Circuit
Once Bindu is fully opened, your consciousness has direct access to
the realm of Non-Duality, the Spiritual Realm. This experience is
accompanied by a feeling of complete Spiritual rapture in your Heart
Chakra. You begin to intuitively feel what Jesus Christ meant when he
discussed the Glory of God or the Kingdom of Heaven and the beauty of
this magical realm that is the birthright of all human beings. The Bindu is
our doorway into Cosmic Consciousness. Once opened, a constant feeling
of inspiration enters your life. You begin to feel like you are living on
Planet Earth, but emotionally you are in Heaven.
Once Bindu becomes unlocked in the Body of Light, it encourages the
Sushumna, Ida, and Pingala Nadis to maximize their capacity to channel
energy. The Kundalini Light now flows through these channels unimpeded,
with more velocity than ever before, powered by the Bindu. Light energy
powers the Chakras in the Aura, enabling you to attune to any of the inner
Cosmic Planes or Realms of existence. These include the Physical, Lower
and Higher Astral, Lower and Higher Mental, Spiritual, and Divine Planes.
The Planes below the Divine Planes correspond with the Seven Chakras.
The Bindu is the release valve for the sublimated Light energy to
channel into, which, when awakened, completes the Kundalini circuit. It

unifies one's thoughts and emotions, allowing us to experience complete
transcendence in consciousness. Its activation raises the vibration of our
consciousness, aligning us with the Spiritual Body. The Bindu serves as a
black hole for the individual consciousness. By entering it, we unite with
Cosmic Consciousness and become One with the Universe.
Through the Bindu, your consciousness can easily leave your body
when you become absorbed in any form of meditation. Once this occurs,
you begin to channel thoughts from the Cosmic Consciousness. It is the
realm of the Spiritual Plane since all thoughts and feelings are reconciled in
the "Lake of Fire" which lies within it. This fire activates the "Glory of
God" concept as a tangible emotion felt in the Heart Chakra and the
physical heart. Figure 5 illustrates the movement of the Light, which is the
Kundalini energy in its more sublimated state.
In the Hindu religion and Jainism, it is customary to wear a bindi, a
coloured dot on the centre of the forehead. It implies the connection
between the Mind's Eye (Ajna Chakra) and the Bindu Chakra. In essence,
we reach the Bindu Chakra through Ajna, as is the case for Sahasrara
Chakra. However, as mentioned, we cannot access the Bindu unless
Sahasrara is fully opened since an alignment in one implies an alignment in
the other. The Hindus call the Bindu a "point of creation," where all things
are held together by Unity. They describe the bindi then as "the sacred
symbol of the Cosmos in its unmanifested state".

Eradication of Memory
After the awakened Bindu aligns your consciousness with the Spiritual
Plane, the next phenomenon in the Kundalini transformation process is the
streaming of random memories before your Mind's Eye. This occurrence
results from the Bindu's intimate relation to Ajna Chakra and the Pineal
Gland. Since the mind becomes silenced in the Spiritual Plane, it gives rise
to old memories resurfacing for a brief moment, one after the other, like
waves in an infinite ocean of consciousness. These memories can be recent,
although they are usually from an older time, going as far back as your
childhood.
The Self uses the Mind's Eye to experience these past memories that
the Bindu produces. To be accurate, the Bindu "fishes" them out from the
Causal Chakra, one of three Transpersonal Chakras above the head and one
that has an intimate connection to the Bindu. The Fifth Dimensional energy

of love influences the Bindu to release old memories, thereby removing the
emotional charge that binds them to your Chakras.
And as these memories stream across your consciousness, the psyche
is being liberated, one memory at a time.
The visual component of seeing these random memories flash before
you one by one is accompanied by an intuitional feeling of what the
memories felt like as those events were happening. So, in a sense, you get
to relive these experiences all over again. However, this time, your Self is in
a neutral state, meaning that you are no longer psychologically affected or
emotionally attached in any way to these occurrences. You are now
operating from the realm of Non-Duality, meaning that the Ego and the
mind are bypassed.
As you are discarding old thoughts and emotions through the Bindu,
you may feel like you are losing your mind often because your Ego realizes
its hold over the consciousness is weakening. However, this memory
eradication process is normal and can often continue for a very long time.
After all, it took the Ego many years to develop, and with each memory, it
became stronger. Now the process is reversing, as you are reverting to your
original, innocent state before the Ego started to develop.
Now, you can't abolish the Ego altogether while living in the physical
body since it does serve the purpose of protecting your body from
immediate harm. Jesus Christ, one of the most extraordinary Holy men to
live on this Planet, lived with an Ego his entire life, guiding and
commanding it. His second last sentence on the cross was, "My God, My
God, why have you forsaken me?" (Matthew 27:46) This utterance came
from his Ego, which came through in consciousness in the last moments of
Jesus' life to petition God for help knowing that the physical body is about
to perish. This statement was followed by, "It is finished." This is the last
thing his Higher Self said before he died. Here is a perfect example of the
dichotomy of Ego and Higher Self and how each can take over the
consciousness at any point in time, depending on circumstances and
irrespective of how Spiritually evolved we are.
So, you see, you can't destroy the Ego in this life. However, you can
remove its clutches so that the Soul can take over the driver's seat and be
your guiding force in life, including everyday decision-making. And since
you are no longer plagued by fear by attuning to the Spiritual Plane, the Ego
has nothing to bribe you with anymore. A big part of the Ego's functioning

includes how it reacts to fear energy and the fictional yet scary scenarios
that the mind creates, which the Ego seeks to prevent from happening.
Another significant part of the Ego's modus operandi is enticing you with
thoughts and desires of tending only to the pleasures of the body and your
own needs and wants. However, since you are no longer bound to your
body and recognize the oneness of all existence, the Ego has little power
over you in this regard as well.
The Kundalini awakening experience will take you from Earth to
Heaven in a single decade in most cases. As these subtle processes take
place, trying to rationalize what is happening to you is futile. The same
faculty you are using to rationalize things is being eradicated by the
Kundalini Fire to enable you to start operating entirely on intuition.
Memory seems to dissipate through this process, as does the impulse to
rationalize and explain everything happening to you through logic and
reason. Hence, the notions of "letting go" and "going with the flow" are part
of the Kundalini transformation process. By questioning the process too
much with your Ego, you will be impeding the flow of the Kundalini, in the
long run, making your transformation take longer than it should.
Think of the analogy of what happens when you apply fire to water in
the physical reality—you get steam or vapour. The Fire Element is the
awakened Kundalini energy, while your memory belongs to the Water
Element whose essence is pure consciousness. Expressing itself physically
as your body's water content, the Water Element comprises over 60% of
your Physical Self. The steam or vapour is the gunk, or harmful
components of your Water Element, the memories of who you were or
thought you were when these past events occurred. However, these
memories are nothing more than illusions bound to your Karma, clouding
your essence and preventing the inner Light from shining into the world. As
time goes on, and the Kundalini Fire continues acting on the different
Chakras, purifying them in the process, these old memories become
extricated out of you. This Ego eradication is also a Soul cleansing process.
After some time passes, you will begin to see waves and energy patterns in
your Mind's Eye as visual images resulting from the impressions that your
environment makes on you. To get there, though, many personal memories
have to be purified. You may even see memories of past lives since this
purification process is not bound to only this lifetime. Remember that the

Soul, which we are trying to purify and exalt here, has existed for many
lifetimes.
As consciousness withdraws more and more into the Bindu, you begin
to lose awareness of your physical body to the point of becoming numb to
sensations from the outside world. At a higher level of Spiritual Evolution,
your consciousness leaves your body entirely, accompanied by a feeling of
the physical body being injected with novocaine, a powerful painkiller and
numbing agent. It reaches a point where, if you were to apply an ice pack
onto the skin, you would not feel the cold but only a numbing sensation.
High levels of histamine are released to accomplish this phenomenon. Once
the major brain centres are opened up, higher dopamine and serotonin
levels are released, contributing to an elated, blissful emotional state and
super-human willpower.
This process of consciousness expansion is never-ending. You begin to
live in this reality continuously as the Bindu gets increasingly fueled with
Light energy brought in through food intake. As nutrients get absorbed by
the body, the Kundalini Light being circulated inside your Nadis grows in
size and speed of movement, perpetually expanding your consciousness
unceasingly.

Complete Metamorphosis
You begin experiencing different physical sensations through the
Kundalini transformation process. The first physical manifestation of these
energetic changes is the feeling of ants crawling on the skin. Some people
experience their body parts being zapped as the Seventy-Two Thousand
Nadis, or energetic channels are being infused by the Pranic energy. A
sensitivity to the air around you may develop, making you susceptible to
getting a cold or flu. I have found that this phenomenon is dependant on
whether the Air Element is dominant in your Natal Chart. Remember to
keep warm to avoid getting sick if you begin to feel the cool air on your
skin in a new way. You also might start to develop allergies as your sense of
smell is heightened. You will begin to smell particular scents as if the object
or person is in front of you, although, in reality, they might be miles away.
All of the processes I've outlined so far are interconnected. Together,
they activate and develop the powers of the Body of Light so that the
consciousness can gradually align to its vibration and experience Cosmic
Consciousness. The Body of Light is like a tree whose branches (Nadis)

reach out to the skin's surface from the inside. Its centre is in the Heart
Chakra, Anahata, the central area of the body where multiple Nadis
intersect. These branches serve as receptors that use the air around them as
a medium or conduit for communication. They are antennae that connect
with the invisible worlds, the Cosmic Planes I have mentioned previously.
Further growth of this energy tree occurs through feeding the physical
body with the correct nutrients, vitamins and minerals. Protein is essential
as it helps build up the Body of Light. Vitamin C is also critical as it helps
regulate the Adrenal Glands, which get exhausted by the Kundalini
awakening process. Fear puts a strain on the Adrenals, and as you are
experiencing a catatonic crash, the Dark Night of the Soul, fear becomes
greatly amplified. Therefore, it is vital to drink orange juice or other fruit
juices which contain Vitamin C to avoid having the Adrenal Glands
damaged permanently.
The Kundalini transformation process is such a shock to the Ego as it
is dying off. As a result, there might be a tremendous amount of negativity
that surfaces from your subconscious. If you had a complete and permanent
Kundalini awakening, this process begins right away since it's the full
activation of the Body of Light by the breaking of the Cosmic Egg that
generates the beginning of a completely new life. At first, your new life is
met with many unique challenges as you try to make sense of the process.
Having the proper guidance is helpful as it allows you to "let go" from
trying to control the process and allow things to happen to you naturally.

Light and Vibration Inside the Head
After a full Kundalini awakening, in addition to Light energy now
being present inside of your brain at all times (Figure 6), you will also
experience a buzzing, vibratory sound. This sound is heard because the
Kundalini energy is permanently localized in your head, meaning it doesn’t
move up and down your spinal column anymore, nor does it drop down to
Muladhara. So what often sounds like the buzzing of a swarm of bees can
also be described as the sound of an electrical current or radiation.
The vibratory sound can best be heard on the inside when the clamour
of the outside world is quieted down. You will also notice that it becomes
higher in pitch when you bring food into the body since your energy current
increases. The sound varies from its neutral state that sounds like the
buzzing of a swarm of bees, to a more aggressive sound, like a jet engine,

although not as pronounced. When it gets more dynamic or higher pitched,
this indicates more vigorous Kundalini activity in the Body of Light.

Figure 6: The Brain Filled with Light
Some awakened people have expressed concern about this permanent
vibratory sound in their heads, saying it has made their lives rather
uncomfortable. My advice is to learn to live with it instead of fighting it or
hoping it goes away because it doesn’t. It is a permanent part of your life
now since it is the sound of the Kundalini energy inside of you. However,
once you distance yourself from the Ego and align with your Soul more,
you will accept the vibratory sound as part of the process and may even
learn to enjoy its presence.
I have found that using earplugs when going to sleep allows me to use
the sound to soothe and quiet my mind, enabling me to fall asleep quicker.
It did take many years, though, to learn to let go and appreciate this sound
but knowing that it is a natural part of the process and not some malicious
foreign entity in your Aura is half the battle.
These two manifestations, the Light inside the head and the constant
buzzing in the ears, mark a permanent awakening. Remember that the
Cosmic Egg needs to have been blown open by the initial Kundalini rising
and the Seventy-Two Thousand Nadis of the Light Body activated via its
Ambrosia nectar. If this event has not occurred, then the full Kundalini
activation did not happen. You may be dealing with a partial rising into
individual Chakras, the most common of which is a rising into the Heart
Chakra Anahata.

TYPES OF KUNDALINI RISINGS
A Kundalini awakening can occur in many different ways and for
various reasons. The most common one is a spontaneous awakening through
the use of recreational drugs or after having undergone severe trauma in your
life. With trauma, a Kundalini awakening occurs as a defence mechanism
once the Soul has had enough of the pain being caused in the body. The Soul
hijacks the consciousness long enough to induce relaxation in the body. This
total surrender, accompanied by a rush of positive emotions, can awaken the
Kundalini energy, and it has for many people.
A less common method of awakening the Kundalini is through a
transmission known as Shaktipat from a person who has had this experience
themselves. The Kundalini can also be stimulated by studying religious and
Spiritual books and understanding some profound truths about the nature of
the Universe and God-the Creator. Put simply, for the Kundalini to be
awakened, something has to trigger it. A trigger could be either a thought or
an emotion, your own or somebody else's. Shaktipat occurs because of the
power of an awakened master's thought and their ability to impart that
thought into your subconscious.
Then there are Kundalini awakenings which occur as a result of direct
Spiritual practice intended to awaken this energy. It can happen through
Yogic practices, meditation, ritual exercises from various traditions, Tantric
sex, and other Spiritual methods solely designed to awaken the Kundalini.
These cases are less prominent in the world today, and most people that I
have encountered have awakened the Kundalini spontaneously and not
through direct practices with conscious intention. The performance of
Spiritual healing practices, like the ones I will present later in this book, can
raise the vibration of your consciousness long enough for the Kundalini to
awaken. However, this again counts as an unplanned, spontaneous
awakening.
Some people leave their modern, fast-paced societies and go to Temples
and Ashrams and live in seclusion for many years in an attempt to awaken
the Kundalini. Many spend a dozen years or more meditating and doing
Spiritual practices to awaken this power, with no success. It is my personal
belief that if you are meant to awaken the Kundalini in this lifetime, no
matter how hard you try or don't try, it will happen to you. Essentially, this

process will not require your effort, but life events will present themselves to
you in such a way that will awaken this power. However, knowing the power
and potential of the Kundalini energy, especially for those people reading
about this subject for the first time, can develop the Soul desire that can be
the catalyst to put this event into motion.

Partial and Permanent Kundalini Awakenings
There are two types of Kundalini awakenings—permanent and partial
ones. The difference between the two needs to be correctly understood to
know where you are in your process of Spiritual Evolution so that you can
know what to do to progress further.
In a permanent awakening, the Kundalini energy rises from the base of
the spinal column (Muladhara Chakra), moving through Sushumna and into
the brain until reaching the top of the head (Sahasrara). Along its path lie the
Three Granthis, the psychic "knots" that obstruct the flow of the Kundalini.
Each of them needs to be pierced systematically for a full awakening to
occur. Since it forms part of the science and philosophy of Yoga and Tantra,
I will discuss the Three Granthis in detail in the section dedicated to their
practices.
If the awakened Kundalini rises with enough force, it will break the
Cosmic Egg at the top of the head. Once the Cosmic Egg breaks, a nectarlike liquid substance, Ambrosia, pours over the body downwards from the
top of the head, invigorating the Seventy-Two Thousand Nadis of the Body
of Light (Figure 7). This constitutes a "permanent" awakening since the
Kundalini never drops back down to Muladhara. Instead, it stays in the
centre of the brain for the rest of your life.
In a partial awakening, however, the Kundalini never rises to the brain
centre or at least doesn't generate enough power to untie the Three Granthis
and rise to the top of the head to blow open the Cosmic Egg. Instead, the
Kundalini energy drops back down to Muladhara only to repeat the process
of rising in the future. The Kundalini wants to rise to the top of the head, and
it will continue to attempt to do so until it unties all Three Granthis and
achieves this goal.
Therefore, in a gradual or "partial" awakening, the Kundalini usually
rises to a particular Chakra on its systematic upward movement. It does this
to open that specific Chakra so that you can gradually work to purify the
Karmic energy stored within it. In this case, there will not be a flood of

negativity since the entire Tree of Life is not opened, only certain Spheres or
Sephiroth of the Tree of Life. Therefore, this gradual or partial awakening is
a more comfortable way to evolve Spiritually. However, there is no
guarantee that the Kundalini will ever reach the top of the head in this
lifetime.
Remember always that we cannot choose how we awaken the
Kundalini. I wish I could tell you that a method works 100% of the time or
even 10%, but I would be lying. So whoever tells you that they have
discovered a technique that always works is fooling themselves and others,
whether intentionally or not. My personal belief is that you cannot choose
with your Ego to have this experience in this lifetime but that it must be a
Soul decision.
It is even possible that we choose to have this experience before we
incarnate on this Planet in this lifetime since it is such a radical shift from
the average, everyday reality that unawakened individuals live in. As such,
higher powers must be involved in the process of making a Kundalini
awakening happen. However, the permanent Kundalini awakening is meant
for everyone, whether in this lifetime or other lifetimes. As I said, knowing
what to look for and preparing yourself for this experience is the first step—
also, moving beyond the constrained social structures that keep our
consciousness bound to the material reality.

Figure 7: The Seventy-Two Thousand Nadis
If, after reading this book, you still prefer spending your time and
energy on trying to get rich instead of working on furthering yourself
Spiritually, then a Kundalini awakening may not be meant for you in this

lifetime. There might still be necessary lessons to learn to see that nothing is
as important as having this experience.
The Hindus call this the process of Shakti (the Kundalini) rising
upwards to meet Shiva (Cosmic Consciousness), where they consummate
their Divine Marriage and become One. Once they unite in ecstasy, Shiva
comes down into the Heart Chakra to produce the continual act of renewal
within the consciousness of the Kundalini initiate. While in this perpetual,
regenerative state, you become free from the burden of sin as you lose
yourself within yourself. You become like an innocent child again, looking
into the world with fresh, new eyes, from one moment to the next. This
experience is what being in the "Now," the present moment, truly means.
The Now is the field of pure, unlimited consciousness potential that can be
experienced when you have released yourself from bondage to the material
world.

Seeing the Light in All Things
Once the energy finally reaches the top of the head and breaks open the
Cosmic Egg, you will develop an extraordinary world experience. As the
Light builds up inside of you, it transposes itself onto everything you see
with your physical eyes, giving a shimmering, silvery glow or sheen to
everything you perceive in the material world. When I unfocus my vision
and stare at an object for ten seconds or so, this very Light will dematerialise that object right before my eyes.
In the same way someone might see the world on LSD or magic
mushrooms, I see it without any drugs. It became a permanent part of my life
after naturally developing the ability to perceive this Holographic reality, the
Pure Energy blueprint or "double" of the material world. It exists right here
and now, but because our bodies and brains are composed of Matter, we
cannot perceive beyond it without completely transforming our
consciousness.
Planet Earth is meant to be experienced with an awakened Kundalini
because the fact is that the material world is alive and is Pure Energy. I
remember how I saw things before this transformation, and I can safely say
this is Planet Earth 2.0. It is almost as if I was given a permanent virtual
reality headset to wear 24/7. This is what I was referring to when I said that
the outer reality becomes "digital."

With a full Kundalini awakening, you also begin to feel the essence of
everything you perceive in your Heart Chakra, Anahata. Once attained, this
new experience of reality is a permanent transcendental change in how you
experience the world around you. Once it happens, you can never turn it off
again.
As I mentioned previously, however, not everyone sees Light in all
things after a full Kundalini awakening. Most do not. The first person who
corroborated this experience for me was not someone I spoke to personally
but a renowned author on the topic of Kundalini, Gopi Krishna. Gopi talked
about this phenomenon in his books, namely Living with Kundalini, which
captured the essence of this gift. The book painted a solid portrait of the
Kundalini awakening process and its manifestations and gifts, including this
new visual lens that develops.
This phenomenon occurred in me five months after the initial Kundalini
awakening in 2004 and is still with me today. This visual upgrade is not the
only varied gift in Kundalini awakened individuals, though. However, it is
the most crucial one, in my opinion, since it drastically changes your
perception of reality and allows you to see the Holographic nature of the
world, its digital blueprint, with your very own eyes.
I have even had moments in deep meditation when the outer world
appeared like a 2D movie screen projection, whose surface was made of
golden Light. The weirdness didn't end there, though. I was able to "scry"
inside this vision and see parallel Universes that exist here and now but are
imperceptible to normal human sight. (Scrying is a process of looking into
physical objects using the Mind's Eye.)
I experienced this vision as a complete rapture that swooped up my
consciousness. It came over me like a wave, and I became pure
consciousness embracing it. These parallel world visions often transported
me to medieval times for some reason, only to a much smaller scale than our
present time world. It made me understand that parallel worlds exist here
and now within the 2D beam of Light coming from the Sun. Once I could
alter my inner vibration, I could see them with my very eyes.
Imagine having this ability and being reminded every waking moment
that the world you live in is made of pure energy. It makes it very easy to
disassociate with the Ego and prioritise the Spiritual life, which I did and
never looked back.

Because of the intensity and force of the Kundalini energy as it surged
through my spinal column during the awakening process, it blew open my
Mind's Eye exponentially before rising to the top of the head. This event
occurred because I was performing a mental visualisation exercise utilising
the Mind's Eye during the awakening process. Gopi was doing the same as
recounted in his books. By focusing attention on the Mind's Eye tunnel, our
doorway into the inner Cosmic Planes, the Kundalini enters it upon rising,
expanding its circumference before rising to Sahasrara. The Mind's Eye
tunnel is doughnut-shaped, serving as a mental screen that visual images
play on when experiencing visions.
It is possible that if you do not implement a visualisation exercise that
brings attention to the flower head of Ajna Chakra (between the eyebrows),
the Kundalini doesn't fully activate its power. In this case, the Kundalini
does reach Sahasrara and may even blow open the Cosmic Egg, but the full
potential of Ajna Chakra is not awakened. This is one option. The other
option is that Ajna does open but not with enough intensity that it causes this
radical shift in visual perception.
Of course, these are my theories, but ones based on logic and reason
since many people who report having had the Cosmic Egg blow open and
the feeling of being "electrocuted" don't see Light in all things afterwards.
Whatever the case, let it be known there are varied Kundalini awakenings
and experiences, and not all are the same.

KUNDALINI AWAKENING FACTORS
When attempting to awaken the Kundalini energy directly, many factors
must be working together at the same time to be successful. For one, if you
are trying to awaken it through mindfulness meditation, the vibration of your
willpower must be substantially higher than your mind chatter for you to
induce silence. Thus, it is unlikely you will awaken the Kundalini with this
method unless you have been doing it for a long time and are proficient in it.
A simpler approach is to use a visualization meditation instead. You are
to hold an image of a symbolic object (such as a lotus flower or a God or
Goddess statue) in your Mind's Eye for an extended period. By holding a
constant and steady image in your mind, your willpower begins to vibrate at
a vigorous intensity, pulling your consciousness inwards. If you can hold this
image while neglecting the random thoughts that come into your head, you
will have some level of Spiritual experience and maybe even awaken the
Kundalini energy at the base of your spine. At the least, you will enter the
Mind's Eye portal to experience the Astral World, which can be an
exhilarating experience if you have never done this before.
Now, if the image you are holding in your mind has a sexual
component, it is possible to stir the Kundalini into activity at the base of the
spine. Sexual energy is essential in this regard since any kind of sexual
excitement, when projected inwards, can activate the Kundalini. I had heard
of many cases of spontaneous awakenings that occurred after the individual
experienced a higher-than-normal level of sexual excitement while
maintaining a pure and silent mind.
A Kundalini activation can occur when sexual energy is sublimated and
channelled into the brain upon climax instead of being released externally by
ejaculating. A visualization meditation during sexual activity focuses energy
inwards, towards the Mind's Eye in the brain. It can cause the Kundalini to
awaken and rise up the spine, systematically blowing open all lower Chakras
until it enters the brain. However, to ensure that it rises with enough force, it
is crucial to be performing some kind of visualization exercise to pull the
Kundalini into the brain, where it can rise to the top of the head and
complete the process.
The key to this process is to generate raw sexual energy with a pure
mind and heart, thus stimulating Muladhara and Swadhisthana Chakras into

activity. When done correctly, you will feel sensations in your abdomen that
are both euphoric and ecstatic. Your whole body will begin to tremble and
shake, and you may even get goosebumps from how pleasant these
sensations feel.
The sexual energy has to build on itself and get stronger with merely
the power of your thoughts. Most people are unaware that sexual excitement
can grow exponentially, and it doesn't always have to result in an external
orgasm. When trying to awaken the Kundalini, the key is to channel the
sexual energy inwards using your willpower and imagination instead of
expelling it through your genitals.
During my Kundalini awakening, I was holding an image in my mind
of a beautiful and erotic woman, which I focused on so intensely that I
projected into the Mind's Eye portal and could experience her as real.
However, what generated the intense force with which the Kundalini
awakened was the buildup of sexual energy as I made love to her in my
mind. This sexual energy amplified and grew in power until I experienced
my first internal orgasm. However, the experience didn't end there. Another
internal orgasm followed it, and multiple more, all in succession with
increasing intensity and velocity. My genital area felt like a locomotive
speeding up and building momentum with every turn of its wheels.
A feeling of sexual excitement in my abdomen grew exponentially in
synchronicity with the internal orgasms. They came in continuous rushing
waves for about fifteen to twenty seconds. Then, at their peak, when it felt
like my brain and body couldn't take any more ecstasy, the Kundalini
awakened at the base of the spine. It felt like a golf-ball-sized sphere of
energy that just appeared out of nowhere.

Completing the Kundalini Awakening Process
Once the Kundalini awakens, it naturally travels upwards through the
spinal column. However, if you awaken the Kundalini spontaneously,
without a meditative practice, it will likely not reach Ajna Chakra. As I
mentioned, to rise with force, which is necessary to reach Ajna Chakra
inside the brain, it is essential to consciously hold an image in your mind
with willpower and imagination. Note that spontaneous Kundalini
awakenings that occur from the use of hallucinogenic drugs can be powerful
since they involve a change in perception that stimulates the Mind's Eye.

A complete awakening requires that the Kundalini rises into the brain
through Sushumna, the middle channel, accompanied by Ida and Pingala,
which fuse into one energy stream at Ajna Chakra. Once they have joined
their masculine and feminine energies, they unite with Sushumna as One to
rise to Sahasrara and blow open the Cosmic Egg (Figure 8) which holds the
potential of your Body of Light, your Cosmic Self.
Sahasrara can potentially be opened with Sushumna alone. However, if
Ida and Pingala don't join forces at Ajna, there could be debilitating
problems in the energy system that can wreak havoc on your thoughts and
emotions. Such is the example of Gopi Krishna's initial rising, where he
awakened Pingala and Sushumna but not Ida. His nervous system was in
complete disarray after the awakening since he didn't have the cooling
energy of Ida present, which caused ongoing anxiety with no end. After
almost losing all hope, he tried a visualization meditation in a desperate
attempt to awaken Ida. Because Ida represents the feminine principle, the
essence of the Water Element that is the source energy of all visual images,
Gopi finally succeeded in awakening Ida, which rose to Ajna to complete the
Kundalini awakening process.
It is essential to understand that Sushumna Nadi always accompanies
Ida or Pingala or both simultaneously, which is the desired option. Ida,
Pingala, or both can't rise into a Chakra without Sushumna being present
since the Sushumna Nadi carries the Kundalini energy. Ida and Pingala
channel the feminine and masculine energies, but the Kundalini rises up the
spinal column, which is the Sushumna Nadi.
Before Kundalini can enter the brain, it must pierce Vishuddhi, the
Throat Chakra. Vishuddhi is more advanced than the lower Chakras since it
is the first Chakra of the Spirit Element. To pierce it, one must have evolved
past major Karmic energy of the lower Elements, which correspond with the
lower four Chakras. (More on the connection between the Elements and
Chakras and Nadis in a later chapter.)
If you have awakened the Kundalini through meditative means, I advise
you to continue performing your meditation instead of just letting go once
you feel the Kundalini rising. Doing so is the key to gathering enough force
for the Kundalini to pierce Vishuddhi Chakra on its upwards rise and then
enter the brain to try and complete the process.
To awaken the Thousand Petalled Lotus of Sahasrara, the three Nadis of
Sushumna, Ida, and Pingala have to unify into one energy stream in the

middle of the brain in the Third Ventricle before rising to the top, centre of
the head. Once the Lotus begins opening like a flower in bloom, the Cosmic
Egg atop the head gets pierced by the Kundalini. However, the Lotus does
not have to open fully for the Cosmic Egg to break. If the Kundalini rises
with enough force, the Cosmic Egg will break right after Sahasrara begins
opening. Then, the Ambrosia nectar from the Cosmic Egg is released, which
pours over the body from the top-down, activating the Seventy-Two
Thousand Nadis of the Body of Light.
So you see, having a full Kundalini awakening requires some conscious
effort on your part to complete the process. Most spontaneous awakenings
are partial Kundalini risings. My case is one of those rare situations where
the Kundalini awakened with incredible force, but only because I was
unknowingly performing a Tantric sex meditation with a sexual visualization
component. Because I had such an intense Kundalini awakening seemingly
by accident, I always considered myself blessed and obligated to share
everything I have learned and experienced with the world.
It is crucial to understand the Kundalini awakening process and
memorize its mechanics. There are many differing viewpoints on this topic
from people that experienced this event. However, I have found that a small
percentage of those people completed the process and raised the Kundalini
to Sahasrara. And even fewer still broke open the Cosmic Egg and activated
the Body of Light. Then there are those who activated the Body of Light but
don't report seeing Light in all things with their physical eyes, which tells me
that they did not have a full Ajna Chakra activation. So you see, there are
many varied experiences of this same Universal process.

Figure 8: The Cosmic Egg

I can generally ascertain what type of Kundalini awakening someone
had from listening to their experiences and comparing reports. Generally, the
ones that did not complete the Kundalini awakening lack the knowledge of
the final part of the process. For example, most people know that the
Kundalini awakens the Chakras and seeks to expand the consciousness.
However, in my experience, most people are unaware of the existence of the
Cosmic Egg, the Body of Light activation (which results in the feeling of
being electrocuted), and especially the remodelling of the brain to perceive a
higher level of reality through an expanded Ajna Chakra.
By memorizing the entire Kundalini awakening process, you are giving
your mind a road map of how this event can occur for you. Sharing this
information is one method to help you awaken the Kundalini yourself and
complete the process.

Aligning With The Spiritual Body
Although it feels as if the Kundalini activation is happening in the
physical body, it is taking place in the Body of Light. As I discussed in The
Magus, we are all born with the Body of Light, inextricably tied to our
physical body. However, we need to fully activate its powers in this lifetime
to optimize our energy system, which can only be achieved by awakening
the Kundalini and raising it to the Crown.
When the Kundalini begins to rise upwards, awakening the Chakras,
your consciousness recognizes the existence of the Body of Light, allowing
it to embody the different Subtle Bodies that correspond with the Chakras
that you awakened. The full activation of the Body of Light is one of the
primary purposes of the Kundalini awakening. The Seventy-Two Thousand
Nadis serve to make the Body of Light an antenna to the vibrations of the
outside world. These vibrations are received through the highest of the
Subtle Bodies, the Spiritual Body. Your consciousness gradually attunes to it
after it has cleared the Karmic energy of the lower Four Chakras. To
accomplish this, it must systematically embody the Subtle Bodies that
correspond with those Chakras.
When your consciousness attunes to the Spiritual Chakras, the highest
three, it will align itself entirely with the Spiritual Body, which becomes its
new vehicle. When this occurs, you will discard old modes of functioning
and function through intuition alone. Being in this state does not mean that

you will not feel anything emotionally or won't be able to use logic. It only
means that intuition will become your primary mode of functioning.
You will perceive the world around you through direct energy
experience since your Being will be elevated to the First World of Atziluth,
representing the Spiritual Plane in the Qabalah. (More on this in the next
chapter.) Atziluth is where the thoughts of God exist, the Archetypes that
give humanity a template to work with, uniting our reality. Since Creation is
a systematic process, your conscious experience of life's events filters
downwards into the lower three Worlds (there are Four Qabalistic Worlds in
total) that evolve out of the First World.
By aligning your consciousness with the Spiritual Body, thoughts and
emotions will no longer have the same impact on your mind and body
because they are expressions of the Lower Planes. And since you are now
elevated to a Plane above them, you get to overcome their harmful effects.
Of course, you will still have negative thoughts and emotions since your Ego
is forever tied to the physical body, but you will bypass their energetic
effects. Instead, your Soul will interpret negative emotions as learning
lessons rather than allowing them to take over your consciousness and weigh
it down. As a result, what you experience will be fleeting and in the moment.
Also, you will be able to use logic and reason and think intellectually,
without binding yourself to the Ego and associating with it like before.
The Cosmic Egg breaking after the Kundalini reaches the Crown
signifies the complete, permanent awakening. Within this context,
permanent means that the energy does not fall back down to Muladhara, the
Root chakra. Instead, it stays in the brain. Symbolically, Kundalini Shakti
and its consort Shiva, the Cosmic Consciousness, will have united in a
Spiritual Marriage. This is the Eastern viewpoint of the Kundalini
awakening completion.
From the Western Mystery Tradition's view, you will have received the
wings of the Caduceus of Hermes by completing the Kundalini awakening
process. You will become a prototype of the God Hermes, who is called
Mercury by the Romans. It means that you will have inherited his winged
helmet and winged shoes. Symbolically, this means that you will have your
head in the sky (Heaven) and your feet on the ground (Earth). Your
consciousness will always be in "flight" mode, and you will have a natural
high, almost like you are gliding through Space and Time. These sensations
are what it feels like to have expanded consciousness.

Once you have completed the Kundalini awakening process, over time,
you will develop a connection with your Holy Guardian Angel (HGA), who
will become your guide and teacher in life. Thus, you will have become a
God-human whose transcendental consciousness will continue to live on
past this life and into the next.

Your New Lamborghini Veneno
The activation of Ajna is essential to have the complete Kundalini
experience. I have already described some of the gifts associated with this
phenomenon. Other gifts include the ability to view yourself from outside of
yourself and live in a permanent Out-of-Body Experience. However, the
latter is more so a manifestation of the awakened Sahasrara Chakra. As you
see yourself and the world around you from a higher perspective, you will
realize that Cosmic Consciousness is not just a concept or idea, but a real
thing indeed.
I hope I have done a good job introducing the Kundalini, the awakening
process, and some of the more incredible Spiritual gifts that unfold. Though,
by using words to describe the transcendental experience of reality after a
full Kundalini awakening, I feel I am limiting how extraordinary it really is.
Like Morpheus says in The Matrix, "No one can be told what the Matrix is.
You have to see for yourself." In the same fashion, you need to experience
this for yourself to understand the big picture. But for now, my words will
have to suffice.
A Kundalini awakening transforms the mere human into a Demi-God, a
modern-day superhero, in one lifetime. Only, your newly received powers
are generally not something you can prove to others, but you live and
embody the truth of what you become. Over time, through your expanded
knowledge and your kind deeds towards humanity, you may be recognized
as a Being of Light and its emissary. But to get there, many years will have
to pass, and many challenges overcome.
The key takeaway from this introduction to the Kundalini is that
although there are various ways to awaken this energy, the process will
always be the same. However, without a proper understanding of the
process, it's like being gifted a Lamborghini Veneno, a 4.5-million-dollar
sports car, but not getting its instructions manual nor having any driving
experience. My attempt in Serpent Rising: The Kundalini Compendium is to
write the manual for this invisible Kundalini science of energy to the best of

my ability. And once you have the instructions and blueprints, I want to give
you insight into how to drive your new Lamborghini. To be precise, if your
current vehicle of consciousness can be likened to an old Ford Focus, then
this upgraded vehicle is an Intergalactic spaceship. So, again, I say
Lamborghini so people can relate.
I am grateful to the Universe for having had the Kundalini awakening,
as anyone in my position would. I also believe that luck had nothing to do
with it, and my Soul chose this for me before I was even born. It is not a
coincidence that I was given specific skills and abilities in this life that
would serve me on this Spiritual journey. Due to my obsessive nature and
the need to find the Spiritual tools to help myself early on, I have developed
an exceptional understanding of the Kundalini over the years. My experience
and research on this topic are unprecedented. My journey has led me to
assume the role of messenger to the people about the existence of the
Kundalini energy and the potential of Ceremonial Magick in aiding the
Spiritual transformation process.
My work aims to serve my Creator and fulfil my mission to impart
knowledge to others walking in the same shoes I was many years ago when I
was groping in the dark for answers. We are all warriors in training on this
path of Spiritual Evolution, and our purpose is to evolve and collectively
raise the consciousness of the Earth. By sharing what I know, I aim to pass
on the tools you will need if and when your new Lamborghini breaks down
and you need guidance.
And for those times when others turn to you for guidance, you will
know how to help them also because you were helped. And for those of you
who haven't yet received your new Lamborghini, now you will learn about
it, how it works and drives, and will know what to look for consciously. As
the old saying goes, "Seek, and ye shall find. Knock, and the door will be
opened unto you." But if you don't know what to seek or which door to
knock on, the Universe will not know how to help you. Knowledge is the
most significant power in the Universe.

***
This completes the introduction to the Kundalini and the awakening
process in general. Now I want to segue into other pertinent subjects to give
you an inside look at how your energy system operates; its components,
mechanics, and how it interacts with the physical body. This next portion of

the book is devoted to the Kundalini science of energy. It includes the
critical chapter on human anatomy describing the changes that occur in the
physical body during and after a Kundalini awakening.

PART II:
THE MICROCOSM AND MACROCOSM

THE FIVE ELEMENTS
Classical Elements refer to Earth, Water, Air, Fire, and Spirit. Ancient
cultures such as Greece, Egypt, Persia, Tibet, India, and Japan considered
the Classical Elements as the building blocks of the Universe. They used the
concept of Elements to explain manifested Creation's complexity and nature
in simpler terms. Their lists of the Elements and sequence of manifestation
varied slightly but held the same meanings. The Spirit Element was
interchangeable with Aethyr, Ether, Void, Akasha, and Space, depending on
the tradition. (Note that Aethyr or Aether is just the Latin spelling for Ether.)
The Chinese Wu Xing system is slightly different since it describes various
types of energy in a state of constant flux and interaction with one another,
referred to as the "Five Phases" of natural phenomena. The Five Phases of
Wu Xing are Wood, Fire, Water, Metal, and Earth. The Chinese Elements are
seen as ever-changing and moving, while the Classical Elements are separate
from one another even though they are parts of a whole.
The Ancients postulated that the outside Universe (Macrocosm),
including the energy composition of every human being (Microcosm),
consists of the Five Elements. The Five Elements correspond with the Seven
Chakras (Figure 9). They comprise our Aura and the Cosmic Planes and
Subtle Bodies that our consciousness partakes of.
The first four Chakras correspond with Earth, Water, Fire, and Air,
while the three higher Chakras correspond with Spirit. The Chakras, in turn,
compare with the Sephiroth on the Tree of Life in the Western Mystery
Tradition. Their correspondence is complex and not as apparent as many
Spiritual teachers believe, but the relationship is there. For a thorough
exposition on the Sephiroth and the Five Elements, consult The Magus:
Kundalini and the Golden Dawn.
Understanding how the Elements operate is an essential pre-requisite
for Advanced Yogic practices, many of which are presented in this book. In
the Eastern Spiritual system, the Five Elements correspond with the Tattvas,
which will also be explored in Serpent Rising.
The Five Elements are the basis of Yoga and Ayurveda (Sanskrit for
"knowledge of life"), which is traditional Indian holistic medicine developed
around the same time as Yoga (approximately 3000 BC). Ayurveda is based
on the three constitutions, or Doshas—Vata, Pitta, and Kapha. Vata is the

energy of movement (Air and Spirit), Pitta is the energy of digestion and
metabolism (Fire and Water), and Kapha is the energy that forms the body's
structure (Earth and Water). Every person has a unique balance of the
Elements within them and, therefore, a unique Dosha. The Elemental
dominance found in a person's Western Astrology Birth Chart, especially as
per their Sun, Moon, and Rising (Ascendant) Signs, often determines their
Dosha. However, one should analyze their Vedic Astrology Birth Chart to
obtain a correct diagnosis, as is done traditionally in Ayurveda. (More on
Ayurveda and the Three Doshas in the Yoga section.)

Figure 9: The Five Elements and the Seven Chakras
The Five Elements also relate to the five senses: Spirit, or Aethyr, is the
medium through which sound is transmitted; thus, the Spirit Element
corresponds with the ears and hearing. The Fire Element is related to the
eyes and the sense of sight since fire manifests Light, heat, and colour. The
Air Element relates to the nose and the sense of smell, while the Water
Element is related to the tongue, the organ of taste. And finally, the Earth
Element is associated with the skin and the sense of touch. This information
is essential when exploring Spiritual Healing practices since the application
of each one requires using one or more of the senses to impact the
consciousness.
By purifying and balancing the Elements within ourselves, we attain
and maintain good health and raise the vibration of our consciousness. All
Spiritual practices essentially aim at this goal. Whether performing a
Ceremonial Magick Spiritual Alchemy Program (as presented in The Magus)
or performing Yogic practices regularly, the goal is always Spiritual
Evolution.
Hermetic Qabalah and the science and philosophy of Yoga state that the
Microcosm is the direct reflection of the Macrocosm, and vice versa—As
Above, So Below. In The Kybalion, this concept is called the Principle of
Correspondence, a Universal Law or truth underlying all existence. All
Spiritual traditions are built around this Law, and they all contain some Solar
or Lunar element to them, representative of the Masculine and Feminine
Principles of Creation.
On a basic level, the Principle of Correspondence implies that the
Microcosm, the human Aura (our energetic composition), finds its reflection
in the Macrocosm—the Universe and, more particularly, our Solar System.
(This concept works the other way around as well.) We all carry Planetary
and Zodiacal energies within ourselves. Balancing them and rising in
consciousness is the "Great Work" of the Alchemist, referring to our undying
quest to unite our consciousness with the Cosmic Consciousness of the
Creator—it is our pursuit of Enlightenment.

The Pentagram
The symbol of the Pentagram, or "Five-Pointed Star," has been around
since the time of Ancient Babylonia and Greece. In Western Esotericism, the

upright Pentagram (Figure 10) is called the "Star of the Microcosm." When
the Pentagram is inscribed in a circle, it is called a Pentacle, used mainly by
Wiccans. According to Pythagoras, five is the number of the human being.
Each of the five points of the Pentagram represents one of the Five Elements
of Earth, Air, Water, Fire, and Spirit, as symbolized by the legs, arms, and
the head.
The Pentagram's magical associations make it a potent ritualistic
symbol used to invoke the power of the Five Elements, notably in
Ceremonial Magick and Witchcraft. It is also used as a religious symbol by
Modern Neo-Pagan faiths and the Freemasons. When the Pentagram is
oriented upright, it stands for the Spirit presiding over the Four Elements and
is, therefore, a symbol of Light, love, and the Higher Self. The upright
Pentagram attracts Angelic forces while serving to protect from Demonic
ones. As such, it is used in White (Light) Magick.

Figure 10: The Pentagram
Interestingly, the upright Pentagram was a Christian symbol long before
modern Neo-Paganism adopted it. It represented the five wounds of Jesus
Christ on the Cross of the Four Elements and the daily self-sacrifice
necessary to achieve the upright Pentagram, symbolically, which causes the
Spirit Element to descend into the Four Elements and completely transform
the consciousness.
When the Pentagram is inverted, it has opposite magical associations.
An inverted Pentagram represents the Four Elements commanding the Spirit,

symbolizing darkness and Ego dominance. This symbol invites Demonic
energies while repelling the Angelic ones, making it a fitting symbol for
Black Magick practices (the Dark Arts), which uses supernatural powers for
evil and selfish purposes.
Satanists use the inverted Pentagram as a symbol of their faith. They
refer to this symbol as the "Sigil of Baphomet"—the goat-headed God
associated with duality, materialism, and the Carnal Self. Many Satanists are
Atheists who don't believe in the afterlife and only value this lifetime.
Hence, they argue that the inverted Pentagram is not a symbol of evil but
one that aligns them with the types of energies that will help them achieve
their goals in life. However, if you believe that this life is just one in a
continuous chain of lives that your immortal Soul experiences, aligning
yourself with dark forces to satisfy your Ego's desires is catastrophic for
your Spiritual Evolution.

The Four Worlds and the Pentagrammaton
Although this is a condensed version of two significant lessons from
The Magus: Kundalini and the Golden Dawn, it is worth mentioning again
since it sums up the entire Kundalini awakening process and its purpose
from an occult perspective. In The Torah (The Old Testament), the name of
God is Jehovah, whose esoteric name is the Tetragrammaton (YHVH),
which means "four letters" in Hebrew. (Keep in mind that the Hebrews read
and write right to left.) The four Hebrew Letters stand for the Four Elements
—Yod (Fire), Heh (Water), Vav (Air), Final Heh (Earth). The Four Elements
are found in the four lowest Chakras, while the Fifth Element, Spirit,
represents the higher three Chakras. As you can see, in the Tetragrammaton,
the Spirit Element is absent. There is a reason for this.

Figure 11: The Four Worlds and the Tetragrammaton (YHVH)
The four letters of the Tetragrammaton also represent the Four Worlds
of the Qabalah—the Qabalistic model of the Creation and manifestation of
the Universe (Figure 11). The Qabalistic Four Worlds make up the entirety
of the Tree of Life: Yod (Fire) represents Atziluth, the Archetypal World,
Heh (Water) stands for Briah, the Creative World, Vav (Air) is Yetzirah, the
World of Formation, and Final Heh (Earth) is Assiah, the Physical World.
The Four Worlds directly relate to the Cosmic Planes. However, in the

Qabalistic framework, the World of Primal Fire (Atziluth) represents the
Spiritual Plane, while the other three Elements relate to the Mental, Astral,
and Physical Planes, respectively.
You will notice that the Cosmic Planes correspondences omit the Spirit
Element from the Four Worlds model; Qabalists believe that we lost
connection with the Spirit Element after the Fall from the Garden of Eden.
As such, it is something that we must obtain in this lifetime. However, the
method of achieving this feat is given in the mystery of the Pentagrammaton.

Figure 12: The Pentagrammaton (YHShinVH)

The Pentagrammaton (YHShinVH), meaning "five letters," implies the
integration of the symbolic Hebrew Letter Shin (Figure 12), referred to as
the "Three-Fold Flame of the Soul." Shin contains three strokes that visually
resemble the three main Nadis of Ida, Pingala, and Sushumna that rise along
the spine during a Kundalini awakening. The Nadis, in turn, correspond with
the two intertwining snakes around the central staff of the Caduceus of
Hermes.
When placed amid the Tetragrammaton, Shin reconciles the opposing
masculine (Fire and Air) and feminine (Water and Earth) energies within the
Self. It represents the Judgement Tarot Card whose Tree of Life path is
called the "Spirit of the Primal Fire." This card alludes to the awakening of
the Holy Spirit and its integration within the Self. Shin’s Fire of consecration
burns away impurities over time, an allusion to the Kundalini Fire’s lengthy
purification process once awakened.
The Pentagrammaton is also the occult key to the Christian mysteries
since it represents the name of Jesus Christ, according to Renaissance
occultists. Jesus's English name is derived from the Classical Latin "Iesus,"
based on the Greek form of the Hebrew name Yahshuah (Yeshua), usually
translated as Joshua. Yahshuah, however, is spelt YHShinVH, which is the
Pentagrammaton. The Pentagrammaton also connects us with the five
wounds of Jesus and the Kingdom of Heaven we reach in consciousness
when we have sacrificed ourselves, our Egos, and have integrated the Spirit
Element.
So you see, Jesus Christ was the prototype of the Kundalini awakening
process; he represents God-the Creator's Divine Love and the expanded
consciousness that enables us to partake of the Spiritual and Divine Realms.
While in The Old Testament, humanity was in a fallen state Spiritually, in
The Holy Bible (The New Testament), Jesus brought the Holy Spirit into the
world so that all who believe in him and follow his example can become
Resurrected or Reborn Spiritually and attain Eternal life.
Spiritual Rebirth can only truly be attained when we embody Jesus'
teachings, whose foundation is unconditional love being the guiding force in
our lives. One doesn't have to be a Christian to appreciate the Spiritual value
of such a mindset. We find historical examples cross-culturally of Yogis,
Saints, Adepts, Sages, and others who became Enlightened through humility,
piety, and ethical conduct towards their fellow humans. This includes people

like Mahatma Gandhi, Mother Teresa, Martin Luther King Jr., the Dalai
Lama, Swami Vivekananda, and others.
It is a fact that if you devote yourself to cultivating only loving thoughts
and actions, fear will leave you entirely, allowing the impulse of your Ego to
fall away, which will prepare you for a Kundalini awakening. Hateful,
selfish, dishonest people can never awaken the Kundalini energy, no matter
what method they use and how hard they try. The Soul must be readied for
such an experience, which we can only achieve by becoming loving, honest,
and just.
Whether you are Christian, Muslim, Jewish, or Buddhist, it does not
matter; the process of salvation is Universal. Therefore, instead of waiting
for some Deity to save you according to whatever religious scripture you
believe in, you must be our own Messiah (Saviour) by assuming the role of
Jesus, metaphorically speaking. You are all Gods and Goddesses by
birthright, but you need to awaken and raise the Kundalini to the Crown,
thereby infusing the Divine Light into your Chakras to optimise your
energetic potential.

The Elements in Nature
Everything you see before your eyes consists of Spirit energy. Hence,
the Spirit Element is termed "Space" in the Eastern Yogic and Tantric
tradition—the idea of physical space being all around us and extending out
infinitely in all directions. Spirit vibrates at the highest frequency of
vibration; hence, it is invisible to the senses. It interpenetrates all of physical
Matter as the base energy that comprises all of it.
During the creation of the Universe, the high vibration of the Spirit
Element began to slow down, manifesting sequentially as the four primary
Elements of Fire, Water, Air, and Earth. All created things retained the Spirit
energy in its state of potential—meaning that the Spirit is found within all
things in existence, as are the other Four Elements. Other than the Physical
Plane of Matter, which is visible to the senses and represents one aspect of
the Earth Element, the other Elements are invisible but can be accessed
through consciousness.
The four primary Elements are divisions of nature and the foundational
energy of everything in the Universe. However, the Four Elements are not
technically four, but three; since the fourth Element of Earth is the
composition of the three foundational Elements in their densest form.

Therefore, Earth and Spirit are alike in many ways but exist at opposite ends
of the vibratory scale. The three fundamental Elements are Water, Air, and
Fire.
The Planet Earth represents the gross aspect of the Earth Element. In
the Qabalah, we refer to our physical existence on Planet Earth as Malkuth
(the Kingdom), which includes the land we walk on. Through Malkuth and
our corporeal senses, we can experience the physical manifestation of the
other three Elements: the oceans, seas, rivers, and lakes (Water), oxygencontaining air (Air), and finally, the Sun (Fire) as our primary source of
Light and heat.
Each of the Five Elements represents a state of Matter. For example,
Earth constitutes all solids (including food), Water is all liquids, Air is all
gaseous substances, and Fire relates to combustion or flame, which has the
power to transform states of Matter. For example, water can change into a
gas (steam) through fire application, which turns back into water, and then
ice (solid) if fire/heat is withdrawn long enough.
We require all the Elements for survival. The Sun is our heat source;
without it, we would freeze. Water and food give our bodies sustenance;
without them, we would die in a matter of days (water) or weeks (food).
Breath (air) is the evidence of life, and without oxygen, we could not survive
for more than a few minutes. Finally, we have Spirit, or Space, the Void
representing darkness, emptiness, and vastness, that serves as the basis for
all Spiritual experiences.
Many Ancient systems regard the Four Elements as inner Realms and
Kingdoms which we can access through Spiritual practices, some of which
are explored in this book. Understand that you are working with the Five
Elements whenever you work with the Seven Major Chakras. The Spirit
Element is the only one that corresponds with more than one Chakra since
its scope is greater than the other Four Elements. As such, we can only
explore the Spirit Element through multiple Chakras.

Figure 13: The Tree of Life Sephiroth and the Three Nadis

The Spirit Element
Spirit is the Prima Materia, the First Substance and the Source of all
things in existence. It is not technically an Element in and of itself but is the
composition of the sum of the Four Elements—it is the building block, the
medium, the glue which holds them all together. As mentioned, since all
things in the Universe came from Spirit, all things will eventually re-absorb
back into Spirit, in due time. For this reason, we seek to Spiritually evolve
and reunite with our Creator's mind—it is an innate desire within us to do so.
The English word "Spirit" comes from the Latin word "spiritus,"
meaning "breath." This correlation between the two words tells us that there
is a correspondence with the Spirit energy and the act of breathing the
oxygen-containing air around us, a physical manifestation of the Air
Element.
All living beings who breathe to sustain their lives require this
continuous process of bringing Spirit into their bodies. Thus, breath is
evidence of life. For this reason, breathing techniques (called Pranayama in
Yoga) are essential in all Spiritual disciplines. In addition, controlled
breathing facilitates meditation, which raises the vibration of our
consciousness to experience higher Cosmic Planes.
Aethyr is another name for Spirit in Ancient traditions and modern
physics. Aethyr represents the formless and invisible medium or substance
that permeates the Cosmos. In The Magus, the Aethyrs are a succession of
thirty Inner Worlds through which we can explore the Elements within
ourselves.
The Spirit/Aethyr/Space Element is attributed to the Throat Chakra
(Vishuddhi), the Mind's Eye Chakra (Ajna), and the Crown Chakra
(Sahasrara). All three Spirit Chakras are expressive of the Spiritual Plane. In
the Qabalah, the Spirit Element represents the Supernals—the Spheres of
Kether, Chokmah and Binah, which sit atop the Tree of Life. The Spirit
Element also includes the upper part of the Sphere of Daath, the invisible
eleventh Sphere, corresponding directly with the Throat Chakra. (Consult
Figure 13 as reference for the Tree of Life Sephiroth and their relation to the
Chakras and three Kundalini Nadis.)
Daath is called the "Abyss" in the Qabalah as the separation point
between the lower seven Sephiroth's duality and the Non-Duality of the
Supernals. The only duality that exists at the level of the Supernals is

Chokmah-the Father and Binah-the Mother. Chokmah and Binah are the
sources of all duality in the Universe, as the Force and Form components,
Soul (Fire) and Consciousness (Water). These two Sephiroth are the source
of the Primal Elements of Fire and Water, although at the level of Spirit (Fire
of Spirit and Water of Spirit). Kether is the White Light that contains these
two dual aspects, which is also the Air Element source (Air of Spirit).
The three Spheres of Kether, Chokmah, and Binah work as a whole.
Chokmah receives its Archetypal energy from Kether, and Binah transforms
those Archetypal ideas into Form. The Christian equivalent of the Supernals
is the Trinity—the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost (or Spirit). The
concept of the Trinity is at the root of all Spiritual traditions, although under
different names. For example, in Hinduism, the Trimurti (Sanskrit for "three
forms of trinity") represents the triple Deity of Supreme Divinity—the
Cosmic expression of Creation (Air), maintenance (Water), and destruction
(Fire). Again, we see the three foundational Elements in action, although in a
different sequence. Air is always at the top of the pyramid, although Water
and Fire might be interchangeable.
Daath corresponds with the Throat Chakra, Vishuddhi. As Daath
represents knowledge and the purpose of our voice box (larynx) is to
generate the vibration (pitch and volume) in our vocal rods, verbal
communication expressed through language links us to the Creator.
The Book of Genesis says, "In the beginning was the Word, and the
Word was God, and the Word was with God" (John 1:1). Therefore, the
Word is our connection to God. As such, the practice of Mantras involving
the use of Words of Power and vibrating our voice box in a deep tone is one
way to connect with our God-given powers and attune our consciousness to
Higher Realms. Since Spirit is the unifying factor of the other Four
Elements, the Throat Chakra, Vishuddhi, represents the synthesis of the Four
Elements into Spirit, expressed through communication.
The sixth Chakra, Ajna, is concerned with psychic sight (clairvoyance)
—the ability to see visual images Astrally, on an inner level. These messages
are often projected from Divine and Spiritual Worlds and give us the gift of
precognition, the ability to predict events before they happen. Since Ajna's
psychic gift is inner visions, it is called the Third Eye, or Mind's Eye. (More
on the importance of Ajna Chakra and its vision portal later on). Ajna is
directly linked to Chokmah and Binah since, through this Chakra, we access
both of these Spheres.

Ajna Chakra is the seat of the intuition, our highest inner faculty of
perception. Intuition allows us to read the energy around us directly instead
of using our intellect or emotions. It gives us a sense of knowingness,
although it doesn't reveal precisely how we know what we know. Intuition
also allows us to access inner guidance from Divine Worlds as it links us to
our Holy Guardian Angel, who resides in the Chokmah Sphere. Ajna enables
us to cut through illusion, access deeper truths, and see beyond the mind and
words. It allows us to experience the Archetypal energy behind the images.
The seventh Chakra is the Crown Chakra, Sahasrara, at the top of the
head. It is the highest of the Major Chakras and their culmination. Sahasrara
is the source of the Spiritual energy and the Great White Light, which pours
into the lower Chakras, thereby powering them. The beginning point of our
Transpersonal Self expresses through our Transpersonal Chakras above the
head and below the feet. Sahasrara is our connection to the Divine Source of
all of Creation and the Spirit Element's highest expression—it represents
unity and the reconciliation of opposites since it is the Chakra of Oneness.
Qabalistically, Sahasrara Chakra corresponds with Kether-the Crown as
the beginning of the Three Veils of Negative Existence, also called Ain Soph
Aur. Sahasrara is the meeting point between the Finite and the Infinite—it is
beyond Time and Space as it is Eternal, meaning it always existed and will
continue to exist till the end of time.
Although the top three Chakras are of the Spirit Element, only
Sahasrara is Non-Dual. Ajna is our mind's vehicle to reach the Crown, while
Vishuddhi connects to the Spirit energy through the spoken Word. Ego
consciousness reaches as high as Vishuddhi, although it loses itself entirely
in Ajna because of Ajna's connection with Sahasrara. Below Ajna, we
experience fear and suffering, while above it, we transcend the Ego. Through
transcendence, we access states of bliss that accompany the Spiritual
experience, which is incomprehensible to the ordinary person who mainly
occupies their mind with Ego desires.

The Fire Element
The Fire Element purifies and transforms all things that are no longer
useful to our body, mind, and Soul. All new things come out of Fire, as old
things are consumed by it—Fire is a powerful cleanser since it burns up
impurities.

The Fire Element is the Masculine Principle and the Father (Chokmah)
energy—the Soul. In Alchemy, the Soul and the Fire Element refer to Sulfur,
one of the three Principles in nature. Fire represents Force and willpower,
and it is the closest of the three foundational Elements to Spirit. The active
part of the Self relies on the Fire Element—it represents the conscious mind
and vitality, confidence, creativity, and courage.
The Fire Element is the third Chakra, Manipura, located in the Solar
Plexus. Due to its location and type of energy, it is related to the digestive
and metabolic processes in the body. The Fire Element represents
combustion within the World of Matter, manifesting both heat and Light. It
brings about transmutation, regeneration, and growth through the application
of heat.
The Fire Element's Qabalistic correspondence is the Geburah Sephira,
whose Planetary attribution is Mars. The Fire of Geburah is one of willpower and drive. The Fire Element is also expressed through Netzach as
desire and passion, which are powered by the Fire Element. Desire is often
instinctual and involuntary, such as sexual or sensual desire. On the other
hand, passion usually involves creativity and is something that we have
control over.
The Fire Element also stimulates and powers intelligence; hence, it
expresses also through the Hod Sephira—as the strength of mind (fortitude)
in the face of fluctuating emotions. Intellect and reason are the willpower's
driving force at the lower levels, while the Soul is the driving force at the
higher levels.
Manipura is expressive of the Higher Mental Plane, right below the
Spiritual Plane. It has direct contact with the Spirit Element and the
Supernals. When Spirit energy descends into Manipura, the willpower is
exalted as it becomes motivated by unconditional love.
Fire is dynamism and motivation, the cause behind the effect. Fire is the
focused willpower that powers the thought behind every consciously
induced action—it requires its opposite (Water) as a barometer and an
impetus for action. A person uses their willpower either out of Self-love or
unconditional love for all of humanity. Therefore, Fire and Water Elements
exist as a duality regarding one another, whether in the body or mind.
People whose Fire Element is inactive have low personal power and no
real control over their lives. Other people do their thinking for them, and
they lack the raw energy to manifest their life's desires. In contrast, people

with an abundance of the Fire Element have the necessary power to manifest
their dreams. They are confident and attract their Soul's desires, including
choosing their romantic partners and not merely settling for whatever comes
their way.
Manifestation requires the application of the Fire Element, which is
filtered through the Earth Element. There are a back-and-forth action and
reaction, continually occurring between the Fire and Earth Elements when
your Soul is your guiding force. Conversely, when your Ego is the guiding
force, the willpower becomes hijacked, and your Earth Element draws its
primary energy from the Water Element's involuntary emotions instead.
The Air Element is needed to fuel both Fire and Water, and your
thoughts can serve your Soul or your Ego. Your Free Will determines who
you are choosing to serve since you cannot attend to both your Soul and Ego
simultaneously.
Fire Element, much like the Spirit Element, expresses through the other
three Elements. It is the highest of the Four Elements in scope and demands
our utmost attention.

The Water Element
The Water Element is the Feminine, Mother Principle; the Yin to the
Fire Element's Yang. Thus, the Water Element relates to Form and
consciousness, as the Fire Element relates to Force and Soul. These two exist
in a symbiotic relationship with one another. In Alchemy, the Water Element
relates to the Mercury Principle.
As the fluid energy of consciousness, the Water Element also relates to
the Sephira Binah, the Astral, or invisible blueprint of all solid bodies in the
Universe. On an inner, human level, the Water Element comprises our
feelings and emotions. It is the passive, receptive part of the Self—the
subconscious. Water (H2O) consists of the hydrogen and oxygen molecules
that sustain material life physically. All aquatic life also relies on oxygen in
the water to breathe.
The Water Element is the second Chakra, Swadhisthana (Sacral),
located between the navel and lower abdomen. Swadhisthana is expressive
of the Higher Astral (Emotional) Plane. Emotions are primarily concerned
with expressions of love in one's life, including the love of Self and love of
others. The Water Element's Qabalistic correspondence is with Chesed,
whose Planetary attribution is Jupiter. Chesed is the expression of

unconditional love, mercy, and altruism, all of which are the Water Element's
highest expressions.
Since it is related to emotions, the Water Element encompasses other
Sephiroth on the Tree of Life, the same as the Air Element (thoughts). Since
the Sphere of Netzach is the form of lower, more instinctual emotions, such
as lust and romantic love, the Water Element expresses through this Sphere
as well. Netzach corresponds to the Planet Venus and desire, which is felt as
an emotion tempered by the Fire Element.
The Water Element also powers the logical, reasoning mind of Hod, as
Hod and Netzach work to complement one another. Hod corresponds to
Mercury, and therefore in this aspect of the Water Element, it works in
combination with the Air Element and thoughts.
The Water Element is also related to sexual energy and instincts found
in the Moon, corresponding with the Sphere of Yesod. As you can see, the
Water Element encompasses multiple middle and lower Sephiroth of the
Tree of Life, as do the Air and Fire Elements.
The Water Chakra's overall human lesson is learning to love without
attachment, through the Soul. You must transform your lower love emotions
into higher ones by allowing your Soul to lead the consciousness instead of
the Ego.

The Air Element
The Air Element is the offspring of the Fire and Water Elements as the
next stage of manifestation. As the offspring, the Air Element represents the
Son energy. For humanity, Air is associated with the intellect and the logical
mind. Thinking and thoughts, just like the air around us, are rapid, quick to
change, and without Form.
As the Fire Element is related to action, Air is associated with
communication. Like the Fire Element, Air is of a masculine quality,
representing activity and energy, but on an inner, mind-level. Air supports all
of life through the act of breathing the oxygen-containing air around us.
Within the physical reality, the Air Element makes up the Earth's atmosphere
as a mixture of gases.
The Air Element corresponds with the fourth Chakra, Anahata (Heart),
located between the two breasts in the chest's centre. Anahata is also the
central Chakra in the Seven Major Chakras model, separating the three Spirit
Element Chakras above, with the three lower Elemental Chakras below. In

the Cosmic Planes model, Anahata is expressive of the Lower Mental Plane,
which separates the Water Element below and Fire Element above. As such,
the Air Element interacts most with these two Elements psychically.
Qabalistically, the Air Element corresponds with the Sphere of
Tiphareth (whose Planetary attribution is the Sun) and the Sphere of Yesod
(which is attributed to the Moon). As part of the Supernals, the Air Element
is attributed to Kether as the creative energy.
Tiphareth is our source of imagination, which requires one being in a
constant act of creation, an expression of the Air Element. Tiphareth is the
centre of the Tree of Life, as it receives all the other Sephiroth energies,
except for Malkuth-the Earth. Malkuth is reached through Yesod-the Moon.
The Air Element has a dual nature. It can be deceptive like the Moon, or
expressive of the truth, like the Sun. Truth is received and perceived through
intuition.
As the Earth Element Chakra (Muladhara) is about stability, the Air
Element Chakra (Anahata) is about its opposite—thoughts. Since thoughts
are comprised of an ethereal substance, they belong to the mind. All living
beings use thoughts to navigate their reality since thinking breathes life into
the Fire and Water Elements within the psyche. Fire represents willpower,
while Water represents emotion and love. One can have neither though
without Air, since thought powers them both. Before you can accomplish
anything in this world, you must first have thought of doing that thing. Thus,
thought is at the root of all of Creation, whether for humans or other animals.
Air also directly correlates with the Element of Spirit/Aethyr and the
Supernals. The Air Element is the balancer of all things mental, emotional,
and Spiritual. As such, it is directly linked to Kether, the source of the Spirit
energy.
Hermeticists argued that although animals have feelings and
imagination, only humans have logic and reason, which they referred to as
"Nous." Nous is a faculty of the mind that is the building block of
intelligence, powered by the Air Element. In the Qabalah, the Sphere of Hod
is linked to the intellect directly. However, in the instance of Hod, Air is
tempered by the Water Element.
Air is also connected to the Element of Fire and emotional thought or
impulse. Thus, Air directly correlates to Netzach—emotions and desires. A
well-functioning mind means that the individual is well balanced in the
Element of Air.

The Earth Element
The Earth Element represents the Three-Dimensional World, the
material expression of the Universal energy. During the Creation process, the
Earth Element was manifested when the Spirit has reached the lowest point
of density and frequency of vibration. As such, it represents all solids that
have mass and take up space, a term we call "Matter." Earth is the synthesis
of the Fire, Water, and Air Elements in their most dense form and the
container of those Elements on the Physical Plane. In Alchemy, the Earth
Element relates to the Salt Principle in nature.
Earth represents movement and action; we require Earth energy to
perform any physical activity. On an energetic level, the Earth Element
represents grounding and stability. An adequate dose of Earth energy is
needed to manifest what is in our minds and hearts; otherwise, our mental
and emotional energy remains in the inner Cosmic Planes.
Within the physical reality, Earth is the organic and inorganic
compounds of our Planet. It represents growth, fertility, and regeneration
concerning Gaia, Planet Earth, the Mother that nurtures our bodies. The
terms "Mother" and "Matter" sound the same and share similar meanings.
Similarly, the Water and Earth Elements have a close relationship as the only
passive, receptive Elements. Earth is the material expression of the Astral
World, represented by the Water Element.
The Earth Element is Muladhara, the Root Chakra, corresponding
Qabalistically to the Sphere of Malkuth. Muladhara is expressive of the
Lower Astral Plane, which is inextricably connected with the Physical Plane
as the connecting link. Therefore, Muladhara is the first Chakra whose
location (between the tailbone and perineum) is closest to the physical Earth.
The Earth Element's expression in our psyche is always related to our
connection to the material world. Some of the more mundane aspects of the
Earth Element include having a job and owning a home and a car. Anything
and everything related to money and ownership of material goods is an
expression of the Earth Element. Too much of the Earth Element results in
being overly materialistic and greedy, which takes away from one's Spiritual
energy.
Earth is the opposite of Spirit—as the Spirit uses the energy of Fire,
Water, and Air on a higher level, Earth uses those three Elements on a lower,
denser level. Earth energy seeks to provide us with the things we need to
make our material, physical existence happy and content.

However, as the Hermetic axiom states, "As Above, So Below"—
Kether is in Malkuth, and Malkuth is in Kether. God is in everything we see
before us and within us—the Spirit energy interpenetrates all of existence.
Therefore, Earth Element directly links to Spirit since Spirit embodies the
Earth. Spirit requires the Earth Element to be enabled to manifest reality in
the World of Matter. When the Spirit manifests through the Soul, the
outcome is fruitful, while when it works through the Ego, the result yields
negative Karma.
The Earth Element focuses on satisfying our basic physiological needs
vital to our survival, such as shelter and the need for air, water, food, and
sleep. Physical exercise is also essential, as is the quality of the food and
water we bring into our bodies. The Earth Element also deals with
procreation and our desire for sexual relations. The Earth Element's energy
quiets our minds and offers us the fuel to tackle our daily physical activities
whose purpose is to keep us moving forward in our Earthly existence.

THE COSMIC PLANES
The Kundalini transformation process begins as a blazing, volcanic
fire, which burns away the dross and impure in the different Subtle Bodies
of the Self. Each Chakra has a corresponding Subtle Body, which the newly
activated Body of Light moulds into since Light is an elastic substance. Your
consciousness then embodies these different Subtle Bodies to experience
their corresponding Cosmic Planes of existence or manifestation. Your Soul
experiences the Cosmic Planes through the mind since it is the mediator
between Spirit and Matter. It acts like a receiver that can tune into these
different Cosmic Planes.
It is essential to understand the concept of the Soul, what it is and how
it is different from the Spirit. The Soul is the individual spark of Light that
we all carry inside us. The Ancients say that the Soul comes from the Sun.
For this reason, they call the Sun "Sol," which is the origin of the word
"Soul." A Kundalini awakening liberates the Soul from the physical body to
travel in these inner Cosmic Planes of existence. The Soul is the highest part
of the expression of who you are as a Divine spark from the Sun. Whether
the Soul is particular only to this Solar System is left for debate. In theory,
since all the Stars channel Light energy, the Soul might be that which can
travel from one Solar System to another and manifest in an organic body on
a different Planet.
The Spirit is the highest essence of the Divine energy and is the
blueprint of all things in existence. Spirit is the "thought stuff" of the Divine
or Cosmic Mind, which projects the known Universe. Therefore, the Spirit is
the animating substance of all things, and it is Universal, while the Soul is
individual and particular for each human being. The Soul is a Fire while the
Spirit is above the Four Elements of Fire, Water, Air, and Earth as their
synthesis—consciousness. The medium of consciousness is the mind and
brain, while the medium of the Soul is the heart. The Spirit is that in which
both the Soul and the mind have their existence.
It may be somewhat complex to understand these distinctions truly,
mainly because the word Spirit and Soul are tossed around in our society
haphazardly without a clear definition of what each means and how they are
different. Most people generally seem to think they are the same thing. The
Ancients have done their best to define both Soul and Spirit, but since the

average person of today's day and age is at a lower level of Spiritual
evolution, the collective understanding is not there yet. Therefore, I hope
this very basic definition of each will help you understand the difference
better.

Figure 14: The Inner Cosmic Planes

As you are progressing through the Kundalini transformation process,
your Soul will gradually enter the different Cosmic Planes of existence
systematically and integrate those experiences into your psyche. You can
also induce particular mental states through Ceremonial Magick ritual
techniques, which invoke one of the Five Elements of Earth, Air, Water,
Fire, and Spirit, as well as the Sub-Elements of each. These ritual exercises
will allow you to access the Cosmic Planes directly since the Five Elements
correspond to the Chakras. Consult The Magus: Kundalini and the Golden
Dawn for these ritual techniques.
The Cosmic Planes of existence occupy the same space and time but
exist in varying degrees of vibration. The lowest and most dense vibration
will be the Physical World of Matter that we live in our day-to-day life.
Once you increase the vibration, you enter into the different Planes of
existence, Astrally, through the mind. The higher the rate or frequency of
vibration, the higher the Plane. Matter is at the lowest frequency, while
Spirit vibrates at such a high frequency that it is practically at rest and
invisible to the senses.
The Cosmic Planes exist within the Aura in layers (Figure 14), the
same as the layers of an onion overlaid one on top of the other. The higher
layers interpenetrate and impact the lower ones. The image in Figure 14 is a
schematic showing the sequence of the layers concerning the Chakras.
However, it is not an exact depiction of the Aura itself. In the human Aura,
each of its Major Chakric layers is closer to one another, overlaid with four
more extensive layers related to the Transpersonal Chakras. As such, eleven
primary layers compose the Aura. (For more information on the Aura, see
the discourse titled "The Aura-Toroidal Energy Field.")
Also, keep in mind that the Aura is dynamic in its expression and is in a
constant state of flux and reflux as it expresses the individual consciousness.
At every moment, different colours swirl and twirl within the Aura
respective to what content the mind and heart focus on and experience.
The Cosmic Planes all exist sequentially, emanating from the White
Light, which is found in Sahasrara, the Crown Chakra. The process of
manifestation of the Divine filters downwards into these different Planes,
and one Plane affects another—there is a symbiotic relationship between

them. As the process of manifestation filters downwards, once it has reached
the Physical Plane, it rises back up to the White Light, systematically
impacting each Plane. The manifestation process then is the continuous back
and forth flow of this entire process, infinite times in a finite moment,
exemplified in the Hermetic axiom of "As Above, So Below."
As you perform actions in the Physical World, you impact these Inner
Planes, thereby forming Karma. Karmic energy is the sum-total of your
actions and the expression of their quality. If your actions are not performed
in the name of God-the Divine, who works through the energy of
unconditional love, then they will carry Karmic consequences. As such,
negative Karma will get lodged inside one of the Planes of manifestation,
for you to learn the lessons of that Plane and attune your actions correctly,
optimising your Chakras in the process.
By experiencing these Cosmic Planes, you can learn about parts of
yourself that need work. And you can work on those parts of Self by
experiencing these Cosmic Planes. For example, sometimes Demonic
entities will lodge themselves in one or more of the Cosmic Planes, and you
need to encounter these Demons and "slay" them. Often, this action is
visually perceived in a vision or a dream as you infuse a Demon with White
Light, disarming them. However, facing them with courage is generally
enough to transform them and remove fear energy from the Cosmic Plane
they dwell in. In turn, the corresponding Chakra will become fine-tuned,
allowing more Light energy to shine through it.
When working with Karmic energy, you are primarily working with
fear, as fear is the fuel of all Demonic energies. The purpose and goal or all
Demons are to scare you somehow. Since fear is quantifiable, by working
with Karmic energy, you are removing fear out of your Aura, little by little,
until it is all gone. However, this process takes many years and requires you
to be strong in mind and heart. You must become resilient and stubborn to
succeed if you want to overcome your Demons. Once all the fear is drawn
out of you, the Demons can no longer scare you, and you will finally have
ultimate command over them. This process is the essence of obtaining true
personal power.

The Five Cosmic Planes
Physical Plane & Lower Astral Plane (Earth Element)

Your journey towards transcendence starts in the Physical Plane,
corresponding with Muladhara, the Base Chakra and the Earth Element.
Muladhara is the lowest of the Chakras, representing the densest Plane of
existence, the World of Matter. This Chakra also affects the Lower Astral
Plane, the energy blueprint of all things in existence. There is a
correspondence with the Physical Plane and the Lower Astral since both
partake of the Earth Element and Muladhara Chakra. The Subtle Body
corresponding to this Inner Plane is the Lower Astral Body. The Physical
Body is the body that we use to experience the world of Matter. This relation
is obvious.
A human being is inextricably connected to the Earth through the force
of gravity. On an energetic level, we are connected to the Earth via the Foot
Chakras and energy channels in the legs that connect to Muladhara Chakra.
This connection allows us to ground our Chakric system while the Sciatic
Nerve grounds our nervous system and physical bodies to the Earth. The
human energetic system is like a tree with roots deep into the Earth. The
Earth nurtures us through this two-way communication, which supports and
sustains our consciousness.
Higher Astral Plane (Water Element)
As you are rising upwards in the Planes, the next in the sequence is the
Higher Astral Plane. It is often referred to as the Emotional Plane, related to
the lower, more instinctual emotions—our actions in the Physical World
illicit an emotional response involuntarily. The Higher Astral Plane is
associated with sexuality, fear, and the Ego since it relates directly to the
subconscious mind. It corresponds to the Water Element and Swadhisthana,
the Sacral Chakra. The Subtle Body particular to this Plane is the Higher
Astral Body.
After a full Kundalini awakening, once the conscious and subconscious
minds are bridged, emotional chaos dominates the psyche for quite some
time. Facing your Shadow Self can be a scary thing, especially if you are
unprepared for such an experience. However challenging it may be, the
Karmic energy of the Water Element needs to be overcome for you to move
ahead on your journey of Spiritual Ascension. Fear energy may take a longer
time to purge, depending on the level of your Spiritual Evolution. With
courage and determination, however, it can be achieved, resulting in

Swadhisthana Chakra becoming tuned, allowing the consciousness to rise
above its level and enter the Plane above it.
Lower Mental Plane (Air Element)
Once you are done integrating the lessons of the Water Element, the
following Inner Plane to deal with is the Lower Mental plane, corresponding
with the Air Element and Anahata, the Heart Chakra. This Plane relates to
your thoughts and rational thinking as well as imagination. Emotions affect
thoughts and vice versa. Because of its connection with the Spirit Element,
Anahata deals with higher emotions, such as compassion and unconditional
love. As such, you may encounter tests of the Soul pertaining to those
energies. The Subtle Body particular to this Inner Plane is the Lower Mental
Body.
Once you have entered the Mental Plane and your consciousness is
vibrating at its level, you will begin to Lucid Dream. Since Anahata is
directly linked to the Spirit Element in Vishuddhi (the Chakra above it),
your consciousness can vault out of your physical body through Sahasrara
Chakra and embody your Body of Light if you have received a full
activation through the Kundalini awakening. Because of its higher density,
the Mental Plane is the contact point for the Body of Light to enter a Lucid
Dream. Once you embody it, you will project into one of the higher Cosmic
Planes. Depending on the Lucid Dream experience you are having, it is
either the Spiritual or Divine Planes. Lucid Dreams begin occurring once
your consciousness is in Anahata, as the influx of the Air Element is what
allows you to project out of Sahasrara.
In a Lucid Dream, you will be fully consciously aware. You will
experience the dream as real since the Body of Light is a vehicle of
consciousness, similar to the physical body, just at a lower density level.
Lucid Dreams are generally characterized by absolute freedom to experience
whatever you desire while in the dream state. Once your consciousness is
projected out of Sahasrara Chakra, a Lucid Dream becomes a full Out-ofBody Experience. (I will discuss Lucid Dreaming in greater detail in the
second half of the book since it is one of the more significant gifts received
after awakening the Kundalini).
Higher Mental Plane (Fire Element)
The next Plane you will have to work through is the Higher Mental
Plane, corresponding with the Fire Element, and the Third Chakra,

Manipura (Solar Plexus Chakra). Manipura relates to your willpower,
beliefs, motivation, and your drive in life. It is where your Soul lies, which
filters through the conscious mind. Your beliefs are formed through habitual
actions and thinking. This connection with the Soul in the Mental Plane
gives rise to Lucid Dreaming as the Body of Light is the vehicle of the Soul.
Keep in mind that both the Fire and Air Elements are connected with the
Spirit Element, and so the Mental Plane is the contact point for reaching the
higher Cosmic Realms.
Many of our ingrained beliefs prevent us from tapping into our highest
potential as Spiritual human beings. Overcoming negative, limiting beliefs is
paramount to living the kind of life you want to live. Beliefs also, in turn,
affect your dreams and goals. The purpose of experiencing these Planes is to
purify the negative Karma stored in each Chakra. Once cleansed, your
consciousness naturally elevates above a Chakra to learn further Soul
lessons in a Chakra above it. The Subtle Body corresponding to this Plane is
the Higher Mental Body.
Spiritual Plane (Spirit Element)
Once you have graduated past the Lower Planes of existence related to
the Four Elements, the Kundalini energy will sublimate and transform into a
soothing, liquid fire, which is much more pleasant. Its quality is of the Spirit
Element, and once this transformation occurs, it becomes your "modus
operandi" for the rest of your life. This Spirit energy elevates your
consciousness into the highest three Chakras of Vishuddhi (Throat Chakra),
Ajna (Mind's Eye Chakra), and Sahasrara (Crown Chakra). It corresponds to
the Spiritual Plane of existence experienced through Sahasrara Chakra and
the Bindu Chakra. It has been referred to as the Philosophical Mercury of
the Alchemists and the Philosopher's Stone.
The Subtle Body corresponding to the Spiritual Plane is the Spiritual
Body. This Spiritual Body is the next vehicle of consciousness which the
newly activated Body of Light works to align with permanently. While in
dream states, the Body of Light moulds into the Spiritual Body to travel in
the Spiritual Plane.
The Spiritual Plane is often referred to as the "Aethyr," and there are
often references to the Aetheric or Etheric blueprint of all forms of Matter. It
is synonymous with the Astral blueprint already mentioned. People often
lack the language to explain this very particular invisible science, so

reference to these terms implies the basic energy blueprint we all have. Do
not be confused if you cannot readily grasp how everything works but be
open to learning, and over time, as you expose yourself to this invisible
reality more, your understanding will heighten.
It is essential to understand that the Kundalini energy is never static; it
is ever-changing in its expression, function, and state. This constant
transformation of the Kundalini energy allows you to enter these different
Planes naturally unless you choose to do it intentionally through ritual
invocation techniques.
Keep in mind that thus far, I am describing the process of rising on the
Inner Planes through consciousness. As the vibration of your consciousness
is increased, you experience higher and higher Planes until reaching the
Spiritual Plane. Your consciousness can reach as high as the Divine Planes,
although their experience usually occurs during Lucid Dreams. The actual
manifestation process is a continuous cycle of Spirit filtering into Matter and
back up again. This process is instantaneous, unceasing and constant, and all
of the Planes in between the two are affected.

The Divine Planes
The Divine Planes of existence refer to the Transpersonal Chakras
above Sahasrara; the lower ones generally relate to the Soul Star Chakra
while the higher ones relate to the Stellar Gateway. Theoretically, there are
limitless Divine Planes of consciousness. Any attempt to explain their actual
number is futile since human consciousness can reach as high as the Mind of
God, which is Multi-Dimensional. Those who attempt to define the Divine
Planes err in their judgement of them since their experiences cannot be
categorized with any degree of continuity.
I will not go into too much detail on the Divine Planes since the
purpose of this work is to focus on the Seven Chakras primarily, as the
initial challenges after awakening Kundalini lies in mastering and purifying
those. Experiencing the high vibrational energy of the Divine Planes in
dream states or waking visions is a transcendental experience that cannot be
put into words since to do so is to limit the experience and bring it down to
this realm of duality.
The Divine Planes are Non-Dual and ineffable, as they are the contact
point between the Unknown and the Known. Information from the Divine
Planes is filtered via the Causal/Bindu Chakra into Sahasrara, the Crown,

allowing otherworldly Beings to make contact with your consciousness.
Whenever you have an "out of this world" experience in your dreams and
are visiting realms never seen or experienced before, you are working with
the Chakras above Sahasrara and "surfing" one of the Divine Planes.
The experience of the Divine Planes is different for everyone. In The
Magus, I have tried to explain some of my experiences with these energy
sources, but I believe I limited those incredible experiences by doing so. If
you have awakened the Kundalini and are experiencing incredible dreams,
sometimes Lucid ones, you are invariably going to contact the Divine Planes
of existence.
You will see landscapes never seen before, beautiful to behold. You
will feel like you are on a different Planet in another Solar System, and in
reality, you might be. Once your consciousness is freed from the physical
body, you can raise it through an inspiring idea or thought. It is uncommon
to experience the Divine Planes during the day unless you are in meditation,
but once you open this door, you may visit it at night.
Once you have made contact with the Divine Planes in your
consciousness, you may be able to feel their presence intuitively, but at night
you can use your Body of Light to enter and experience them. A pull
upwards occurs in your consciousness, and when you enter the Alpha State
during sleep, you can officially vault into the Divine Planes with your Body
of Light. If you feel like you are in this world physically, but your mind is
on another Planet, or another higher Dimension, then chances are you are
experiencing the Divine Planes.

Variation in the Auric Layers Sequence
You will notice that the sequence of Spiritually evolving through the
Elements follows the succession of the Auric layers concerning the Chakras,
except that instead of progressing into Fire after overcoming the Water
Element, I have experienced that one reaches the Air Element instead. Thus,
there’s a gradual jump into a higher layer before going back into a lower
one. That, or the sequence of the layers in the Aura does not follow the order
of the Chakras.
Suppose we follow the Qabalistic Tree of Life system of Spiritual
Evolution towards the Godhead (White Light of Kether). Once we rise
above Earth's Physical Plane, the consciousness experiences the other three
Elements in two separate sequences before reaching the Spiritual Plane.

After leaving Malkuth, the Earth, the individual reaches Yesod (lower Air),
followed by Hod (lower Water) and then Netzach (lower Fire). Then they
rise into Tiphareth (higher Air), followed by Geburah (higher Fire) and
finally Chesed (higher Water). Then they are at the doorstep of the Spirit and
the Spiritual Plane, represented by Daath on the Tree of Life. And even
within the Spiritual Plane, the first Sephira, Binah, is attributed to the Water
Element, while the second Sephira, Chokmah, is related to Fire. Binah and
Chokmah are considered the primary sources of the Water and Fire
Elements, Qabalistically. Kether, the highest Sephira, corresponds with the
Air Element and is also considered its highest source.
The Air Element on the Tree of Life is considered the reconciler
between the Fire and Water Elements. For this reason, it is found strictly on
the Middle Pillar on the Tree of Life, also called the Pillar of Balance. On
the other hand, the two Elements of Water and Fire interchange on the
opposing Tree of Life Pillars, the Pillar of Severity and Pillar of Mercy.
Thus, in my experience of rising in consciousness and Spiritually Evolving,
I did not experience the Chakras sequentially. I believe this process is
Universal. Therefore, either the Qabalistic system is correct, or the Chakric
system is, but not both since they are different. I will get more into this
subject later on when I describe and discuss the Eastern concept of Koshas.

IDA, PINGALA, AND THE ELEMENTS
The correct flow of energy through Ida and Pingala is of paramount
importance to the Kundalini circuit's proper functioning. Blockages in either
of these Nadis will prevent the energy from working as it should. If there are
blockages, you will undergo severe mental and emotional problems since Ida
and Pingala regulate the Chakras and consciousness. Ida and Pingala are
powered by thoughts and emotions, which are influenced by the four
Chakras below Vishuddhi (Throat Chakra) and the Elements of Earth, Water,
Air and Fire.
In this chapter, I will discuss how the Five Elements affect the flow of
Ida and Pingala. Through the Spiritual practices presented in this book or the
Ceremonial Magick ritual exercises presented in The Magus, you can attune
your Chakras. Doing so allows the energy currents in Ida and Pingala to flow
correctly, easing any mental and emotional difficulties you may be
experiencing. As described in The Magus, the Thirty Enochian Aethyrs
directly influence Ida and Pingala since they use the sexual energy combined
with the Elemental energy to work on either or both channels at once. I have
found this ritual operation to be the best in attuning both Kundalini channels
and helping them reach their most optimal state.
The Earth Element represents stability and is signified by the Root
Chakra, which is between the anus and genitals. This Chakra is vital as you
have to have energy flowing through it correctly to power the Kundalini
system. The Earth Element gives you the means to correct this Chakra and
attune it properly. As mentioned, energy lines from the Foot Chakras run
through the legs up to the Earth Chakra, Muladhara. These lines need to be
fully activated and optimised after the Kundalini has awakened. Their proper
flow allows the Earth Chakra to work at its maximum capacity. Their flow
also powers the Ida and Pingala Nadis, which begin in Muladhara but
receive their masculine and feminine energies from the primary energy
channels in the legs.
Working with the Earth Element allows one to become grounded,
maximising the flow of energy in the legs. The Water Element and the
emotions influence the flow of Ida (feminine), while the Fire Element
influences the flow of Pingala (masculine). The Air Element animates both

the Ida and Pingala channels since it gives life to the Water and Fire
Elements. Its placement is in the Heart Chakra, Anahata, which contains the
largest confluence of minor Nadis in the body.
Anahata regulates all the Chakras as well as the Elements in the body.
Furthermore, the Heart Chakra connects to the Hand Chakras, which channel
healing love energy, and serve as receptors to read the energy around you.
Once the correct flow is established between the Hand Chakras and the
Heart Chakra in fully Kundalini awakened individuals; it results in the
further weightless feeling in the physical body and the mental disassociation
with it. The Spirit energy needs to permeate the entire physical body
counterpart, the Body of Light, to completely liberate the consciousness
from the physical realm.

Figure 15: Ida and Pingala Nadis and Ajna Chakra

When working with the Air Element, you are working with stimulating
both the Ida and Pingala Nadis. As the two Nadis cross each other at each of
the Chakric points during a Kundalini awakening, they terminate at Ajna
Chakra (Figure 15) in the middle of the brain at the Thalamus centre. Ajna
Chakra's portal is the Third Eye—between and above the eyebrows and one
centimetre inside the head. If the two channels are not crossing correctly, or
if there is a blockage in the movement of either of them at the Mind's Eye
centre, the entire Kundalini system is thrown out of balance, affecting its
function. Often, this results in obsessive thoughts or mental problems similar
to those of schizophrenic or bipolar patients.
Mental health problems in individuals stem from an improper flow of
Ida and Pingala and imbalances in the Chakras. However, we cannot prove
this with modern-day scientific measuring tools. After seventeen years of
observing my mental processes and the ups and downs in my thoughts and
emotions, I have come to this conclusion. I believe these issues are Universal
since Ida and Pingala are active in all people as they regulate consciousness.
However, in fully Kundalini awakened people, their flow is optimized since
the Three Granthis are unlocked, allowing sublimated Pranic energy to
continually feed the system, inducing the transcendental state.

Left and Right Brain Hemispheres
In the Qabalah, the two highest inner faculties of a human being are
Wisdom and Understanding; both received through intuition. These two
aspects of Self exist in duality with one another, as you cannot have one
without the other. They are both related to the Spirit Element as they
represent the Supernal part of the Self, which was never born and will never
die. On the Tree of Life, they are the Chokmah (Wisdom) and Binah
(Understanding) Spheres. They also relate to the ultimate expression of the
masculine and feminine components of the Self, found within the brain as
the left and right brain hemispheres.
The left-brain hemisphere is influenced by the Chiah (found in the
Sphere of Chokmah). Qabalistically, the Chiah is our True Will. It is the
masculine, projective part of the Self, belonging to the Fire Element. As our
Holy Guardian Angel, this part of us continually fuels us to come closer to
Divinity. The Chiah is powered by the Pingala Nadi, which is also associated
with the left-brain hemisphere in Tantra Yoga. It relates to analytic thought,
logic, reason, science and math, reasoning, and writing skills. The Chiah is

fundamentally Archetypal, meaning it is to some degree outside of our
ability to understand it fully. We can use the left side of our brain, but we
cannot understand why we know what we know nor the source of that
knowledge.
The Lesser Neschamah is found within the Sphere of Binah. It is
feminine and receptive, belonging to the Water Element. The Lesser
Neschamah serves as our psychic intuition. It is the Self's highest aspiration
and our deepest longing or most elevated state of consciousness. After all,
our intuitive power links us directly to the Divine. The Ida Nadi powers the
Lesser Neschamah. It influences the functions of the right-brain hemisphere,
such as understanding, emotions, creativity, imagination, insight, holistic
thought, and awareness of music and art forms in general.

Nadi Short-Circuits
Throughout your Kundalini transformation journey, you may encounter
a time when either Ida or Pingala are short-circuited, meaning that they
cease their function for the time being. It is crucial to understand that once
you have opened your Kundalini circuit, it will remain active for the rest of
your life, and short circuits and blockages are temporary bumps in the road.
With short-circuits, you have to rebuild the Ida or Pingala channels
(whichever has collapsed) through food intake, which occurs naturally over
time. At this time, you may be prompted by your Soul to eat more than
regularly to accomplish this since your Soul will recognize what you need to
do to fix the problem.
Short-circuits are Universal issues, and many Kundalini awakened
people have reported this happening to them. If Ida has short-circuited, it is
usually a result of a fearful event in your life that causes such a negative
emotional charge that it over-charges the channel and zaps it with negative
bio-electricity. Pingala short-circuits are less common and are usually a
result of someone or something taking over your life and doing your
thinking for you for an extended period. If this happens, the Pingala channel,
whose purpose is to channel the willpower, will cease its function.
Both channels can be rebuilt over time with food intake and making
changes in your life that may negatively affect their functioning. How you
lead your life invariably affects the entire Kundalini system and how well
the Chakras function, including the Ida, Pingala, and Sushumna channels.

Sushumna requires the brain centres to be open and the Bindu to be
functioning correctly, but it also requires that the connection to the Crown is
well established. If Ida or Pingala, or both, cease their function and are shortcircuited, it can result in Sushumna also not functioning correctly, especially
at the higher brain level. It is impossible to stop Sushumna's flow altogether
since it is our medium for experiencing expanded consciousness, which,
when awakened, can never be annihilated. The ancillary channels of Ida and
Pingala, which regulate the consciousness, can be tempered with, but not the
actual higher consciousness itself.
I will further discuss Kundalini short-circuits in greater detail in "Part
X: Kundalini Damage-Control" and present meditations in the following
section that you can use to rebuild and realign the channels in the head
instead of waiting for it to happen naturally.

PART III:
THE SUBTLE ENERGY SYSTEM

THE AURA-TOROIDAL ENERGY FIELD
An electromagnetic field is a combination of electrical and magnetic
energies. Electromagnetic fields are primary fields that generate and sustain
life. The Aura is an electromagnetic field of energy that exists around every
living and non-living thing in the Universe. It is toroidal in shape since the
torus is the preferred form that the Universe uses to create Matter from
energy.
The torus consists of a central axis and vortices at each end that
circulate energy. In a cross-section, the torus resembles a dynamic doughnut
with a hole in the middle that is infinitely small. Most torus dynamics
contain male and female aspects, where energy spirals upwards in one and
downwards in the other.
The toroidal energy field is a self-sustaining system that continually
circulates energy. The infinity symbol is an ancient 2D representation of the
toroidal field since it carries similar properties of being continuous and selfbalancing. It also represents the Source of all Creation. The Source created
all the tori in existence and is connected to them inextricably.
Every human and animal living on Planet Earth, including the Planet
itself (Figure 16), has its own Aura. The same applies to other Planets and
even Galaxies. All of the Auras in the Universe are influenced by and feed
off each other. After all, we are all interconnected. The many different
ecosystems within the Earth’s atmosphere, such as plant and animal life,
oceans, and even amoebas and single-celled organisms, are linked together
energetically. Through a dynamic exchange of energy, the Universal toroidal
system connects every cell and atom through our physical bodies and
consciousness.
The torus is affected by the continuous movement of Universal energy
or Prana. Its activity is similar to how a wave fluctuates with the movement
of water. Pranic energy is everywhere around us—it is continually flowing in
and out of our Auras. So long as our Sun exists, so do Light and Prana,
which give life to all living things in our Solar System.
One of the primary purposes of the Aura is to exchange and process
communication signals. The Aura of living biological organisms continually
fluctuates depending on what input it receives from the Self, the
environment, or other living things. Although non-living, inanimate objects

have an Aura, theirs doesn’t change much through interaction with other
living or non-living things. The Aura of non-living things is frequently
referred to as the Etheric, or energy body. Essentially, the energy body of
anything is its Aura, which is the product of the continuous movement of a
torus.

Figure 16: The Electromagnetic Field of the Earth

The Human Aura
The Aura helps us interact with the world around us and relay
information into our physical bodies. It extends around the physical body but
also flows through it. The physical body is the Holographic projection of the
individual consciousness powered by the Aura.
I have already described the Aura layers in the human being, which
correspond with the Seven Major Chakras and the Cosmic Planes of
existence. Each of the layers in the Aura has its frequency of vibration and
holds different forms of information. The following four Auric layers relate
to the Transpersonal Chakras of the Earth Star, the Causal Chakra, the Soul
Star, and the Stellar Gateway. They emanate sequentially past the first seven
Auric layers.

The Earth Star Chakra’s Auric layer projects out first after the
Sahasrara Chakra layer, which serves to ground the whole Chakric system as
it connects with the Etheric Body of the Lower Astral Plane. Next is the
Causal Chakra’s Auric layer, which connects the Spiritual and Divine
Planes. Then we have the Auric layer of the Soul Star, which allows us to
access the lower Divine Planes, followed by the Stellar Gateway layer,
representing the higher ones. Finally, Hara Chakra, a part of the
Transpersonal Chakras model, does not have its own Auric layer but instead
interpenetrates various aspects of the Aura since it is our primary Pranic
centre. Each of the eleven Auric layers has a toroidal flow that is nested
together to create the shape of a giant energy egg (Figure 17).

Figure 17: The Human Aura

With the inclusion of the layers mentioned above, the main body of the
Aura is created. In addition, other subtle fields affect our bioenergy and
connect us to one another, other living beings, the Earth, and the Universe as
a whole. These include electrical and magnetic fields that are undetected in
the electromagnetic spectrum, which affect us physically and psychically.
Then there are sound and other electromagnetic forces that affect us, such as
infrared light, microwaves, radio waves, ultraviolet light, X-rays, Gamma
rays, to name a few.
Every cell in the body and every thought and emotion generates an
energy field. As such, there are hundreds, if not thousands, of subtle energy
fields in existence, some of which have not been discovered yet. Scientists
are discovering new energy fields on a regular basis, which further adds to
our understanding of the interconnectedness of all of existence.
In the human being, the axis of the torus runs from the crown of the
head to the groin area, encompassing the Major and Transpersonal Chakras,
and extending down to the feet. Energy flows through one vortex along the
axis and out of the second vortex, where it wraps around its circumference
and passes back again through the original vortex. As the torus spins around
its vertical axis, the ring itself revolves around its circular axis as well.
Incoming energy particles that enter our torus follow a spiral path.
The centre of the torus is the heart, which has its own electromagnetic
field that extends further out from the body than the Auric field. When
people are near one another, an exchange of electromagnetic energy is
produced by the heart, which gets registered by the brainwaves. (See "Power
of the Heart" chapter for more information on this subject.)
The heart houses the Soul. The torus is essentially the Soul's structure
to express itself in the World of Matter. It allows the Soul to make contact
with other Souls in existence. Since philosophically, the Soul expresses itself
through the mind, the mind chose the torus as the most optimal shape in
nature to manifest the physical body. Through the mind, the desires of the
Soul are communicated into the physical body. The body cannot exist
without the mind. When the physical body perishes, the mind does as well,
which eradicates the torus. On the other hand, the Soul can never be
extinguished, and it continues its life journey after physical death.

Aura Characteristics

Aura photography is a relatively new technology (since the 1970s) that
uses a biofeedback imaging system to record and display a person's
electromagnetic energy. Aura reading machines usually take readings from
the hand via a sensor, which records one's inner energies and delivers a
colourful image of the Aura's current state.
The Aura reading biofeedback device I work with is AuraFit, created by
Bettina Bernoth. It integrates cutting-edge technology to display the Aura in
"real-time" using a "smart" bracelet instead of a hand sensor. I obtained the
snapshots of my Aura as presented in this book with the AuraFit System. As
a result of Aura reading technology like AuraFit and others, we can
determine the Aura size, its dominant colours, and the health of the Chakras
at any given moment.
When we look at an individual's energy field, we see the colourful
energy flowing around within the Aura. The type and quality of energy
within you depends on what your consciousness is focusing its attention on.
It may change from one moment to the next since the Aura is continuously
fluctuating regarding expressions of consciousness. The thoughts and
emotions we think of and experience utilize their corresponding Chakras in
those moments in time. When an individual Chakra is being expressed
within the Aura, its respective layer will be dominant, including its
corresponding colour.
Auric colours are continually changing and shifting concerning what
the consciousness focuses on and which layers are involved. However, each
person has a base colour in their Aura, reflecting their personality and
disposition. The person's foundational colour gives us an idea of their
general disposition and emotional state, influenced by their beliefs, values,
and behaviours. The level of a person's Spiritual progression also affects the
colour range within which a person vibrates.
Aura Size
Through Aura reading technology and validated by clairvoyants, we
have determined that the circumference of a healthy Aura with wellfunctioning Chakras extends as far as six feet around a person, on average. If
there are blockages or stagnation of Light energy in the Chakras, it will
weaken the Aura, which will reduce its circumference size. Unhealthy Auras
can shrink to as low as three feet and even to just outside the person’s skin.
The size of the Aura varies and fluctuates in the same way as do its
colours. For example, if a person is contemplative or desires solitude and

rest, they will be inwards focused and keep their energies to themselves,
which shrinks the Aura. Conversely, if the individual desires a connection
with others and adventure, they will be extroverted, which will expand the
Aura. Generally speaking, focusing outwards and sharing your love energy
with others grows the Aura while being introverted and focusing on Selflove shrinks the Aura.
The Aura is like a living, breathing organism in the sense that it
expands or contracts, depending on whether we are introverted or
extroverted and the type of energies we are expressing. For example, if a
person is tired and depleted of their Life energy, their Aura will shrink, while
if they are energized and have a lot of vitality, they will have a more
expansive Aura. Stress also impacts the size of the Aura as it makes it
contract while the consciousness is experiencing tension.
Breathing also affects our Aura size; people who breathe from their
abdomen continually nourish their Seven Chakras with Pranic energy,
keeping the energy system balanced, thereby expanding the Aura. Those
who only breathe through the chest keep their middle to higher Chakras
activated while their lower Chakras remain relatively unused. These people
will have smaller Auras and need to change their breathing patterns to
balance their Chakras and optimize their Aura size.
The general size of the individual’s Auric field is also dependant on
where they are in the Spiritual Evolution process and how much Light
energy they have integrated into their Aura. People with higher vibrations
generally have larger Auras, while those with lower vibrations have smaller
Auras. People with larger Auras have more powerful abilities to achieve
their goals and dreams, while those with smaller Auras have a more
challenging time manifesting the life they desire.
Kundalini awakened individuals who have integrated the Light energy
into the Chakras have Auras whose circumference is well beyond six feet. It
has been reported that fully Enlightened individuals, Adepts, Sages, and
realized Yogis, have radiant Auras whose Light can fill an entire room and
make an impression on everyone in their vicinity.
If someone is being extroverted, optimistic, and engaged in sharing love
energy, yet their Aura circumference is still well below six feet, it is an
indication that there might be illness in the physical body. According to the
Hermetic Principle of Correspondence, the quality of energy in the Aura will
manifest as that same quality physically, and vice versa.

If someone goes through significant psychological and even physical
changes, it will show in their Aura. For example, people who are too spacey
and need grounding will manifest an abundance of energy in their head area
and minimal energy around their feet. For a balanced mind, body, and Soul
connection, the energies should be evenly spread out in the head (mind), feet
(body) and heart (Soul) areas.
Aura Shape and Colour Intensity
When looking at a person's Aura in real-time, various factors are at play
that reflects the Aura's look, from its size and shape to colour intensity.
Firstly, the Aura should be egg-shaped and symmetrical, reflecting the
toroidal energy flow of the individual. The egg shape of the Aura should
have a smooth surface on its outer shell when it is in a neutral state. A fuzzy
outer shell indicates a lack of personal boundaries. If the Aura has holes,
rips, or tears, it gives it a spiky look, indicating mild to severe energetic
problems. Stagnant energy will show as some debris or dark colour spots in
the outer shell.
Bright and radiant colours in the Aura reflect positive and harmonious
aspects of the corresponding Chakras, while dark colours reflect negative,
discordant aspects. For this reason, each colour in the Aura can be lighter or
darker.
All areas of the Aura should radiate the same intensity and brightness.
Areas of colour that aren't distributed equally on both sides of the Aura in
terms of colour intensity indicate Chakric imbalance.
Balanced energy shows stationary, brighter colours, while imbalanced
energies manifest as darker colours. Red, for example, represents the raw
energy of action, which is a positive attribute of Muladhara Chakra, while
dark red represents anxiety and stress.
When the individual is experiencing physical, mental, or emotional
stress, a dark red colour will appear on the body's left side. If the stress
persists, the dark red will come into the heart, throat and head areas,
enveloping the first few layers of the Aura closest to the body.
When the individual shifts their focus away from whatever was giving
them anxiety, of their own accord or through some external influence,
tension will leave the psyche and body, followed by the dark red colour
pouring out of the Aura. However, if stress persists further, it will continue
to fill the rest of the Auric layers and permeate the entire Aura until it is
resolved (Figure 18).

Figure 18: Stressful Energy Entering and Leaving the Aura
Whatever colour is replacing the dark red in the Aura is often seen in
the left side of the body (right side of Aura picture) before it permeates the
heart, throat, and head areas. It will then flow into the first few Auric layers,
followed by the rest of the layers if whatever the consciousness is focusing
on is powerful enough. The new energy will then stabilize within the Aura
until a shift in consciousness occurs.
Suppose we are looking at this experience in real-time with an Aura
reading device. In that case, it appears like a wave of new energy that
sweeps into the heart area, projecting outwards until it fully replaces all the
dark red spots within the Aura. The last remnants of the deep red are
sometimes seen on the right side before they disappear altogether.
When a thought or emotion dominates one's energy field, it looks like
the Aura takes an in-breath, while when an inner shift occurs, the Aura takes
an out-breath, thereby expelling the corresponding colour out of the system.
The colours that come into the Aura are always a result of intention and
attention concerning thoughts and emotions the consciousness focuses on.
We can change them at any moment with the application of willpower. What
you think about or give attention to determines your reality, and we can see
its manifestation in the Aura.
Figure 19 shows a progression of Auric colours from a stressful state to
a peaceful and balanced meditative state. The first pic shows a deep red that
fills the entire Aura, which gets replaced by a calmer red in the next pic,
followed by a complete clearing in the third pic from an applied mindfulness
exercise.

The tranquil mind raises the vibration of consciousness progressively
through the Chakras. After orange, it manifests the yellow colour in the
Aura, followed by green, blue, indigo, violet, and lavender, in sequence.
The final white colour represents one's state of mind when they are
clear of all thoughts, positive and negative, representing the most substantial
connection with Sahasrara—the Divine White Light. A white Aura brings
Divine bliss that we can feel in the Heart Chakra.

Figure 19: Progression of Auric Colours from Lowest to Highest
Chakra

Aura Anatomy (Areas of Colour)
Above the Head
The colour above Sahasrara Chakra represents your consciousness and
the present moment. Therefore, it relates to your thoughts and what is
currently on your mind. Your thoughts are projected from the Mental Plane
and are more changeable than the emotions. As such, the colour above the
head is the fastest to change.
If a band of colour stretches like an arch across the upper part of the
Aura, it indicates one's hopes, goals, and aspirations (Figure 20). The band's
colour tells us what type of aspirations or goals the individual has on their
mind. For example, if the band is indigo or violet, it indicates that the
person's current ambitions are Spiritual. A blue band shows one's aspirations
to be concerned with creative expression. On the other hand, a red band
indicates more monetary goals concerned with increasing the quality of one's
earthly life.
Around the Heart
The colour around your heart area is expressive of your mood and
general disposition. This colour relates to the Astral Plane, which includes
the first two layers closest to the body. These two layers surround the
physical body, stretching around the head and enveloping the feet.
Since how we feel is more substantial and less changeable than what we
think about, the heart area is expressive of our core personality. It represents
the Chakra that we utilise the most throughout the day. It is common to see
the same colour above your head and around your heart and body since we
often think about things that are in line with how we feel.
The heart area colour is your foundation; it is the dominant colour in
your Aura representing the Self at this moment in time. As your general
beliefs and views on life change, so does your core colour. If the individual
undergoes a life-changing event, there is often a radical shift in their core
colour.
Your core colour changes throughout the day to reflect changes in your
emotions, but it generally goes right back to its neutral state. As such, the
best way to obtain your core colour is to monitor the Aura for a shorter

period. Taking a single snapshot of an Aura with an Aura reading device is
insufficient to get the core colour.
Another factor impacting our core colour is how well we utilise our
Throat Chakra, our centre of communication. When we intensely express
ourselves verbally or through body language, the Throat Chakra tends to
become illuminated, which lights up the throat area, brightening up our core
colour. So speaking your truth and expressing yourself is crucial to having a
healthy, unclogged Aura with free-flowing energy and bright colours.
Left Side of the Body
The left side of the body represents the feminine, passive, receptive,
Yin energy that is being impressed upon the imagination. The colour present
on the left side shows us energy coming in either Self-cultivated or projected
into us by another person or even environmental stimuli. As such, this colour
energy represents the future if we absorb and accept it and allow it to take
hold of our consciousness.
If our present disposition is more powerful than the energy being
impressed upon us, it will linger on the left side shortly and leave the Aura
entirely. However, if we embrace this energy, it will pour into the heart area
and spread outwards to become the dominant colour in our Aura that has
overtaken our thoughts and emotions. As mentioned, though, unless the new
energy that came into our centre is akin to our general disposition, it will
vanish from the Aura soon after to be replaced by our core colour.
If the energy on the left side is being projected into us by a person we
are in contact with, either in a healing session or through verbal
communication, it is common to see that same colour as the dominant one in
their Aura. Remember that our imagination must always be fueled by
willpower, either our own (as it is optimal) or someone else’s.
In many Aura readings, a dark red colour will come into the left side if
a person is being triggered emotionally or mentally. It will stay there for a
few moments as consciousness processes it. If the individual’s nervous
system is strong enough, they will overcome it, and the dark red will pour
out of the Aura. If they allow it to take over mentally or emotionally, or both,
the dark red will permeate the Aura and take over as the dominant colour,
meaning that stress has fully taken hold of the consciousness.

Figure 20: Aura Anatomy
If the colour on the left side is the same throughout the entire Aura, the
energy is felt very strongly as the individual is congruent with their thoughts,
emotions, and actions. If the colour on the left side is the same as the colour
on the right side, the individual carries out what they are thinking, even
though they may not be feeling it. For us to tangibly feel any energy, it has to
take over as the base colour and permeate the heart area and the first few
layers of the Aura.
Right Side of the Body
The right side of the body represents the masculine, active, projective,
Yang energy. It portrays recent energy that has passed through us and is now
being released and expressed. It is the energy of action that is a by-product
of what we are thinking and feeling. Since it is the energy we are putting out
into the world, it represents how other people perceive us—our persona.
When we express something, we are making an impression upon the
Physical Plane and building memories. Every act we perform has meaning as
it either liberates us or binds us further to our Wheel of Karma. We need to
make sure that the energies we are projecting into the material world are not
dark and muddy, as they are expressive of the negative qualities of the
Chakras.
As the colour on the right side represents the conscious Self in the act
of expression, the left side colour represents the subconscious. As such, the
left and right sides of the Aura show our introverted and extroverted Selves.
If we are naturally very social and extroverted, then the colour on the right
side will shift and change often as we express ourselves in the world.
However, if we are more introverted and spend a lot of time thinking and
contemplating our emotions, then we will get more energy shifts on the left
side, with very little to no movement on the right side.
For example, a writer who spends time thinking and contemplating
ideas will have consistent colour and energy shifts on their left side.
Conversely, a singer performing in a concert will be in a continual act of
expression, and so the colours on their right side will be changing and
shifting concerning the emotions they are expressing through their songs.
They will have little to no time to go inwards and become introspective to
consciously make an impression upon their imagination. However, the

colours coming into their left side will correspond with the energies being
projected at them by their fans in attendance.

Energetic Problems in the Aura
Energetic problems within the Aura manifest as holes, rips, or stagnant
energy (Figure 21). Holes in the Aura can be found on the outer shell and
look like vacuums of draining energy; they represent severe energy loss and
vulnerability to negative influences. Aura holes can quickly create an
imbalance in the energetic system by leaking energy out and allowing
unwanted energies to enter from the outside.
Aura holes manifest when individuals spend too much time
daydreaming and not being present in their bodies. Any activity that
promotes absent-mindedness and not dealing with your emotions as they
happen can potentially make holes in the Aura. Substance and alcohol abuse
are notorious for making Aura holes, as is everyday cigarette smoking.
A highly porous Aura is like an energy sponge. Being overly sensitive
to environmental stimuli creates confusion about your own identity over
time. Simply put, it becomes difficult to ascertain which thoughts and
emotions are your own and which are other people's. Individuals with holes
in their Aura often turn to people-pleasing to feel safe in an environment.
When triggered or met with confrontation, instead of dealing with the
situation, these fearful people tend to consciously leave their bodies to avoid
experiencing the negative emotions.
We all need to face reality head-on to grow mentally, emotionally, and
Spiritually. By avoiding dealing with reality as it happens, self-confidence
and self-esteem are significantly impacted over time, creating further
energetic problems.
Rips in the outer shell of the Aura are signs of past physical and
psychological trauma that look like tears in a smooth piece of cloth. Rips
allow for psychic vulnerability and energy loss, similar to holes in the Aura
but less intense. Aura rips indicate a history of abuse, whether physical,
sexual, mental, or emotional. On the other hand, a person's harmful habitual
behaviour creates Aura holes, although avoiding dealing with reality
indicates deep-seated subconscious issues.

Figure 21: Energetic Problems in the Aura
A person who is deeply wounded constantly feels threatened by others.
They are reactive and ready for conflict at all times. Often, they
inadvertently hurt other people, even when they are just trying to help them.
These individuals must diagnose the source of their pain and treat it through
therapy or Spiritual healing practices. Doing so will help them regain their
sense of identity, repairing the rips and holes in their Aura.
Stagnant energy in the Aura manifests in a variety of ways. Debris
particles represent stagnant, ungrounded energy that manifests in the Aura or
along the Body of Light. Energetic debris consists of dirty, static particles
that are usually dispersed in one area and result in scattered thoughts and
emotions.
Another example of stagnant energy is dark colour spots along the
Aura’s outer shell that look like thick, muddy puddles of water. When
stagnant energy accumulates over a more extended period, it becomes denser
and turns into energetic sludges—thick oil-like blots that are dark in
appearance.
Stagnant energy is caused when the individual holds onto thoughts or
emotions for too long without expressing them. Over time, it can turn into
dense or heavy pockets of energy that back up in parts of the Aura, making
the mind sluggish. Colour blots are usually found in the same area and
involve one or more of the corresponding Chakras (depending on the
colour). Energy clouds on the inside of the Aura are often felt as stress that
lies hidden deep within the subconscious.
Dark spots in the Aura are like psychic residue that separates us from
the present moment. By not allowing ourselves to express what we think and
feel, we take away our ability to make strong connections with people.
Instead of relying on truth and facts to guide our reality, we tend to live life
through associations and assumptions since we lack the courage to be more
expressive. Not loving oneself enough weakens the Throat Chakra, which is
usually associated with stagnant energy in the Aura. People with many dark
spots in the Aura tend to live in seclusion as they feel safer being isolated
from others.
Finally, unhealthy attachments manifest as energy cords that connect
two people through one or more of their Seven Chakras. Interactions that
constantly contain intense fear, anger, or some other negative emotion imply
the existence of an attachment cord (or cords). Attachment cords are often

found in unhealthy relationships between family members. They are often
the result of guilt or other unresolved emotions that bind two people
psychically.
Attachment cords may also be created through a shared traumatic
memory between friends or strangers. Two common examples where
energetic cords may be present are co-dependent and sadomasochistic
relationships.
Spiritual ties are the opposite version of negative attachment cords.
They represent positive attachments between two people, which channel
loving, healing energy from one to another. Spiritual ties are often shared
between a person and their pet, especially with dogs who channel high
vibrational energy to their owners and are tied to them in this lifetime.

The Aura and Vibrations
The Hermetic Principle of Vibration states that all things in the
Universe vibrate at a particular frequency. Since our bodies are mostly made
up of water, sound vibrations in the environment are continually being
inducted into us, directly affecting what we think and how we feel. In turn,
these vibratory states affect our Auric toroidal field and either strengthen or
weaken it. Keep in mind that a person's heart electromagnetic field works in
concert with their Auric field, inducing it with emotional energy.
Sound is the most transcendental of the senses and one that attunes us
most to the higher Cosmic Planes. Pleasant sounding music that has
harmonic rhythm affects our Aura, eliciting a positive emotional state. It
puts us in touch with our Souls, healing us. On the other hand, music with
discordant tones creates sound waves that do the exact opposite. It can make
us feel anxious and agitated, thereby inducing fear energy. In the case of the
former, our Aura expands since pleasant-sounding music creates a loving
emotional state that makes our hearts vibrate with joy. In the latter, our Aura
contracts to shield and protect us from harmful vibrations. For example,
modern-day hip-hop music uses the 808 drum machine whose lowfrequency beats tune us into the Root Chakra, Muladhara. Its dense vibration
keeps our consciousness bound to the material plane, often inducing
irritation and aggressiveness.
We are strongly affected by electromagnetic energy released from
technological devices in our homes, even though most of us are unaware of
this fact. Computers, cellphones, tablets, and especially WiFi routers

interfere with the natural flow of our toroidal field and can cause
disturbances. For this reason, it is not uncommon for people who are
sensitive energetically to turn off their cellphones or plug out their WiFi
routers when going to sleep. Some go even as far as plugging out all
technological devices out of the electrical sockets to neutralize the
electromagnetic energy present around them.
The foundation of all higher vibratory energies is love. In contrast, all
lower vibratory energies are based on fear. The general rule to keep in mind
is that positive, loving energies make the Aura expand, while negative, fearbased energies make it contract. The contraction of the Aura occurs to
safeguard the person's energies, while the expansion occurs to allow more of
the positive outside energies to enter in.
We are naturally drawn to loving, peaceful, and calm people since they
affect our Aura positively. How many times have you heard the saying,
"This person has a nice Aura about them." Here is implied that the individual
has an abundance of Light energy, which they share readily with others.
Conversely, pessimistic, hostile, angry, and generally chaotic people are
challenging to be around since they negatively affect our Aura. Therefore,
we naturally try to stay away from these people unless they bring out
something inside of us that we wish to heal in ourselves.
It is propitious to the health of our Auric field to spend time outside and
ground with the Earth often. Whether you have been exposed to
electromagnetic frequencies or need to clear your head after an encounter
with a negative person, it helps to go for a walk, especially in nature. Most
people who are drawn to going for a walk after being exposed to negative
energy are consciously unaware that Earth energies aid in releasing
negativity from the Aura by facilitating grounding. The Soul hijacks the
consciousness long enough to motion you to go for a walk to expose
yourself to nature's elements, allowing you to reset and neutralize your
energies.
Walking barefoot in nature on a sunny day is the best and quickest way
to ground yourself with the Earth. The Sun feeds our Auric energies, while
the torus aligns itself with the Earth. Treating the physical body directly
affects our Chakric energies, and vice versa—As Above, So Below. Through
grounding and physical exercise, we clear out negative energy from the body
and detox while relieving physical tension and optimizing the flow of our
Nadis. In turn, our vitality increases, and our Aura strengthens.

Between The Magus and Serpent Rising, I have covered powerful
Spiritual practices such as Ceremonial Magick, Crystal Healing, Tuning
Fork Sound Healing, Aromatherapy, and others. All of these practices aim to
heal and balance the Chakras, optimize the Aura, and Spiritually evolve. Of
course, it helps to combine these practices with Yoga, physical exercise, or
any other methods that work directly on the physical body and ground it.
When the body is healthy, so is the mind, and vice versa.

Kundalini and the Aura
Your toroidal field is an autonomous battery powered by Prana, which
requires food and water for fuel. Once the Kundalini pierces Sahasrara
Chakra and opens the Thousand-Petalled Lotus, consciousness unites with
Cosmic Consciousness, expanding and optimizing your toroidal energy field.
As the Chakras become cleansed and purified over time by the
Kundalini Fire, Light energy permeates the Aura further, powering and
optimizing the Chakras. As such, the Auric field strengthens since the
amount of Light energy a person channels directly influences how
magnetized the Aura becomes. In turn, the physical body reaches its most
optimal, healthy state, and the overall vitality increases.
During the Kundalini transformation, the Hand and Foot Chakras open,
allowing the Spirit to descend and permeate the deepest corners of the Self.
In addition, the flow of energy from the fingers and toes strengthens the
torus and further amplifies the velocity of energy circulating within (Figure
22).
Other energy channels open as well that facilitate the optimization of
the torus. The entire Kundalini awakening process and the transformation
that follows is designed to enable the individual to reach their highest
potential as a Spiritual human being, which is reflected in the expansion of
their bio-energy that comprises the Auric field.
It is no coincidence that a Kundalini awakened person appears unique
to others. Since we are all interconnected, when our energy fields interact,
we can realize intuitionally when someone's energy field is more prominent
than usual. Therefore, a person with an enhanced energy field is naturally
attractive to everyone who comes into contact with them.
Since the centre of the torus is the heart, people who live from the heart,
instead of the head, have naturally more powerful toroidal energy fields.

They are more magnetized and electric, meaning that they naturally channel
more Light energy than someone who lives through the intellect alone.
People who live from the heart love themselves and others since they
are in touch with their Souls. Remember, the Soul lives through the heart,
while the Ego lives through the mind. A person who lives through their heart
is in touch with their intuitive ability. They feel the energies around them
instead of interfacing with their environment through the intellect.
By bypassing the mind and the Ego, you gain touch with the present
moment, the Now, which is the field of infinite possibility. Being in the Now
and living through the heart and Soul expands your energy field, maximizing
your Spiritual potential.

Figure 22: The Kundalini Toroidal Field

THE SEVEN MAJOR CHAKRAS
If you have awakened the Kundalini and risen it to Sahasrara, the
Seven Chakras, corresponding with the complete Tree of Life, are now fully
activated inside of you. Each Chakra is expressed through different parts of
the psyche and affects bodily functions. We can further break down Chakric
energies into the Five Elements since each one corresponds with either
Earth, Water, Fire, Air or Spirit.
The Chakras within the Body of Light and the corresponding Elements
and Cosmic Planes of existence occupy the same space and time as your
physical body. They all exist inside your Aura and form layers of it, which
are, in essence, interconnected and interpenetrating. The higher the Chakra
or Element, the further out it projects.
Muladhara Chakra
The first Chakra, Muladhara, is located between the coccyx (tailbone)
and the perineum. It is the lowest of the Seven Major Chakras and is related
to the Element of Earth and Planet Saturn, the slowest-moving of the Seven
Ancient Planets, relating to Karma and time-cycles. Muladhara is the centre
of our physical energy and grounding. Its modus operandi is the security
and survival of the physical body. Since Muladhara is related to the World
of Matter, its energy is related to physical expression—all physical
activities require Earth energy.
The Kundalini lies coiled at the base of the spine, and it is inextricably
connected with the Planet Earth through the energy lines in our legs, which
connect to our Foot Chakras. Muladhara is also called the Root, Base, or
Earth Chakra because it is the foundation as the lowest of the Seven Major
Chakras. This Chakra's energy is most dense, vibrating at the lowest
frequency of all the Chakras. In the Hermetic axiom of "As Above, So
Below, Muladhara deals with the aspect of manifestation—the Below.
Muladhara has four petals, or vortices, and is the colour red. Foods that
correspond with Muladhara Chakra are root vegetables, red meat, red fruits,
pepper, cayenne, and paprika. Challenges in this Chakra relate to the things
we acquire in our material life and their quality. For example, do we have
the right job, home, vehicle for transportation, life partner, friends, or lack
stability and security in these areas?

An open and active Root Chakra makes one confident, stable, and
grounded. They have an easy time manifesting the life they desire and are
balanced emotionally and mentally. An overactive Root Chakra makes one
materialistic and greedy. On the other hand, an underactive Root Chakra
makes one overly fearful and anxious. By lacking emotional and mental
stability, it is seemingly impossible to manifest anything of value in your
life.
Swadhisthana Chakra
The second Chakra, Swadhisthana, is located in the lower abdomen
and is related to the Element of Water and the Planet Jupiter, the benevolent
Planet of mercy and justice. Swadhisthana deals with emotions, feelings,
and instincts projected through the subconscious mind. Being related to the
subconscious, Swadhisthana is the source of fear energy that significantly
influences who we become in life.
Swadhisthana is called the Sacral or Spleen Chakra. On a basic human
level, the Sacral Chakra affects our sexual expression, social interactions,
and how comfortable we are with ourselves and others. The Sacral Chakra
is the personality aspect of the Self—Ego consciousness that is formed over
time. The Ego is tempered by fear, as it avoids all activities that make the
body and mind feel bad while embracing everything that makes it feel good.
The Ego is primarily concerned with seeking pleasure, irrespective of how
its actions will affect other people.
Swadhisthana has six petals and is the colour orange. Foods that
correspond with Swadhisthana Chakra are orange coloured fruits and
vegetables, eggs, tofu, soy products, peanut butter, nuts, seeds, honey, and
vanilla. Challenges in Swadhisthana are found in what kind of emotions we
carry inside ourselves. Do we feel a lot of fear, and is the fear preventing us
from manifesting our Soul's desires? Do we have joy in our lives, or is life
bland and boring? Do we have issues with intimacy, and are we sexually
expressive? Are we comfortable with who we are, or do we hide from the
world?
When Swadhisthana is open and active, one is in touch with their
emotions and is candid with others, allowing them to form healthy
relationships. They are comfortable with intimacy and are expressive of
their inner desires. A balanced Sacral Chakra enhances creativity and

allows you to go with the flow of life without being too attached. It enables
you to feel happiness and joy in small, everyday activities.
If your Sacral Chakra is blocked or underactive, you become closed off
emotionally from others, naturally withdrawing and going within. In this
state, a person becomes introverted and in overly in-touch with their Ego
and insecurities. In contrast, an overactive Sacral Chakra makes you
excessively emotional, attached to other people, and too sexual, resulting in
promiscuity.
Manipura Chakra
The third Chakra, Manipura, is located at the Solar Plexus, above the
navel. Its other name is the Solar Plexus Chakra. Manipura corresponds
with the Fire Element, and the Planet Mars, hence why it is the source of
our willpower. Our motivation, drive, vitality, and level of creativity are all
governed by Manipura. In addition, this Chakra is in charge of our
confidence, self-esteem and the ability to be assertive in life.
Manipura governs digestion which allows us to transform nourishment
into valuable energy for the body and mind. Manipura works with the
Chakras above and below it since it is the "Seat of the Soul." The Soul
governs our character, while the Ego governs our personality. The Soul
requires intelligence, mental clarity, and the harmonizing of the will with
logic, reason, and imagination. As such, Manipura draws energy from the
Air Chakra above it, Anahata. The Fire of Manipura also activates the
creative impulse, which requires Swadhisthana's emotions for expression.
Manipura has ten petals and is the colour yellow. Foods that
correspond with Manipura Chakra are yellow and gold fruits and
vegetables, dairy products, complex carbohydrates and grains, mustard,
turmeric, cumin, and ginger. The challenges found in this Chakra relate to
how we use our willpower. Are we in charge of our own lives, or are other
people? Are we motivated and driven to accomplish our goals, or do we
lack in this area? Do we express our innermost desires, or are we locked in
our emotions too much? Do we know how to exact severity when others
wrong us, or are we a doormat for others to use?
When Manipura is open and active, we exert dominance in our lives
and feel in control. We have enhanced personal power and are manifesting
our life's goals. Manipura works with the Earth Chakra, Muladhara, to
accomplish these tasks.

If Manipura is underactive, we tend to be passive, indecisive, and
timid. If it is overactive, we become domineering and overly severe. Too
much Fire energy can result in tyranny and oppression over other people.
Willpower needs emotions for balance, which are supplied by
Swadhisthana. If the Water Chakra does not balance our Fire Chakra, we
can become overly aggressive to get what we want and hostile. Willpower
needs love to guide it; otherwise, one's action contains Karmic
consequences. As such, Manipura relies on Anahata for guidance.
Anahata Chakra
The fourth Chakra, Anahata, is located between the two breasts in the
centre of the chest. Otherwise known as the Heart Chakra, Anahata
corresponds with the Air Element and the Planet Venus. Anahata is our love
centre which deals with compassion, affection, altruism, kindness, and
inspiration. It stimulates our imagination, thoughts, as well as fantasies. The
challenge of Anahata is to overcome the Karmas from the lower three
Chakras so that you can attune to the energy of unconditional love.
Anahata is our Spiritual centre since it receives the energy of the
higher three Chakras. It is the centre where we feel unity with all things
through the binding power of love. As such, Anahata is the centre of group
consciousness.
Anahata is connected to our Palm Chakras, which allow us to feel the
energy around us as a quantifiable essence and heal others. Hands-on
healing requires us to channel love energy from Anahata via our Palm
Chakras and project it into areas that need healing. Love energy is the
ultimate healer of mind, body, and Soul.
In Anahata, we understand our life’s work and purpose. Since the
essence of the Air Element is thought, Anahata fuels both the Fire and
Water Elements and gives them life. If this Chakra is inactive, we turn to
selfishness and satisfying the Ego.
Anahata has twelve petals, and its colour is green. Foods that
correspond with Anahata Chakra are the wide variety of green coloured
fruits, vegetables and herbs, and leafy greens. Challenges in this Chakra
relate to the clarity of thought. Are we engrossed in fantasy and illusive
thinking too much, or are our thoughts based on truth? Are we using our
imagination to help us achieve our goals? Are our thoughts of a higher

nature in the direction of helping others or of a lower quality, where our
focus is only to tend to ourselves?
When Anahata is open and active, we are compassionate and friendly
with others, enabling us to have harmonious relationships. We have an
understanding of our Spiritual nature which makes us virtuous and ethical
in our words and actions. As such, we become forgiving, kind, and
charitable. Essentially, our behaviour becomes motivated by unconditional
love as opposed to Self-love.
When Anahata is underactive, we tend to be emotionally cold and
distant. We get too ingrained in the lower Chakras, which makes us
Egotistical instead of exalting our Spiritual nature. We tend to ourselves and
our needs and desires without regard to other people. If this Chakra is
overactive, on the other hand, we smother others with love, often for selfish
reasons.
Vishuddhi Chakra
The fifth Chakra, Vishuddhi, is located in the centre of the neck; hence
it is called the Throat Chakra. Vishuddhi is of the Element of Spirit
(Aethyr); it works in conjunction with the following two Chakras above and
the Chakras below it. Vishuddhi is related to the verbal, subtle, and written
expression of one's thoughts. It corresponds with the Planet Mercury, which
rules communication and the speed of thought. Vishuddhi generates the
vibration of the spoken word on an energetic and physical level.
Vishuddhi also controls discernment and intellect. It has sixteen petals,
and its colour is blue. Vishuddhi Chakra rules all liquids that we bring into
the body. Foods that correspond with this Chakra include blue coloured
fruits and vegetables, salt, sage, and peppermint. Challenges in Vishuddhi
relate to whether we express what is on our minds and how well we
communicate with others. Do we talk too much, or does what we say have
substance? When we talk, do we project power with our vocal cords, or do
we come off meek and timid?
When Vishuddhi is open and active, we speak our truth to others
creatively. We are Self-expressive and use words as anchors to convey our
reality to others. Not only are we great talkers but listeners too, since
communication works both ways.
When Vishuddhi is underactive, we tend to be quiet and introverted
generally. We lack confidence in speaking our truth, which may arise from

Solar Plexus Chakra issues. If we don't convey our truth because we feel
unworthy, we might have problems in Anahata. Speaking our inner truth
aligns us with the Divine while lying aligns us with lower, Demonic
entities.
When Vishuddhi is overactive, we tend to talk too much, which clouds
our ability to listen to other people. This situation usually occurs because of
the Ego's desire to domineer others due to an unbalanced Manipura Chakra.
If we become chatterboxes and lack substance in our speech, other people
generally distance themselves from us. Therefore, it is essential to have a
balanced Throat Chakra if we desire to thrive in life and have meaningful
relationships.
Ajna Chakra
The sixth Chakra, Ajna, is located in the brain's centre, in the Third
Ventricle. (More on the Third Ventricle in a later chapter.) Its more
immediate access point is slightly above the centre of the eyebrows. Ajna is
often referred to as the Mind's Eye Chakra, the Third Eye, or the Brow
Chakra. It relates to the Element of Spirit or Aethyr.
Ajna corresponds with the Moon. Although the Moon is classified as a
satellite while the Sun is our central Star, the Ancient people included both
as part of their Seven Ancient Planets framework, referring to them as
Planets. The Moon is our centre of clairvoyance and intuition. It gives us
insight into the Unknown because it receives information from the Higher
Realms above, through Sahasrara, the Crown Chakra. Ajna is our psychic
centre. It gives us wisdom and understanding concerning the mysteries of
the Universe. We obtain this knowledge through Gnosis, our ability to
channel information from Divine energies directly. This sixth Chakra gives
us the sixth sense of knowing beyond the Self.
Ajna is the essential Chakra concerning the Spiritual and Astral
Worlds. As such, it is the centre of dreaming. Through this Chakra, we
reach the Crown/Sahasrara and exit out of our physical bodies to travel to
different dimensions of Time and Space. These Lucid Dream travels occur
in the Inner Worlds or Planes—we use our Light Body as the vehicle.
Ajna has two petals and is the colour indigo. Foods that correspond
with Ajna Chakra are indigo or dark bluish coloured fruits and vegetables,
red wine, caffeine, chocolate, juniper, and lavender. Challenges in this
Chakra relate to whether we receive higher information from Sahasrara or is

our Mind's Eye closed up? Do we spend too much time in our heads,
focusing on our intellect to guide us or are we in touch with our intuition?
Are our dreams vivid and filled with life or bland and uneventful?
When Ajna Chakra is open and active, we have a good intuition that
serves as our guiding force in life. When our intuition is strong, so is our
faith since we can perceive reality beyond the Third Dimension. A strong
intuition is usually connected with being a consciously aware Spiritual
human being.
When Ajna is underactive, we tend to lose touch with the Spiritual
reality. As such, we begin to rely too much on our intellect and Ego to guide
us in life. Confusion sets in about our true essence, making us look for
existential answers from people of authority.
When Ajna is overactive, we tend to live in a fantasy world. We lose
touch with the reality of who we are and may even experience psychosis.
Someone who uses hallucinogenic drugs too often will invariably
overstimulate their Ajna Chakra.
Sahasrara Chakra
The seventh Chakra, Sahasrara, is located at the top, centre of the
head. As such, it is otherwise known as the Crown Chakra. Sahasrara is our
source of Enlightenment, Oneness, truth, and Spiritual wisdom and
understanding. It corresponds with the Sun, the Star of our Solar System.
The Crown Chakra is the highest Chakra of the Spirit/Aethyr Element, and
it serves as a gateway to the Divine Planes represented by the Transpersonal
Chakras above the head.
Sahasrara is the highest in human consciousness and the ultimate in
understanding and knowledge of the Universe. Traditionally, this centre is
described as a wheel with one thousand (countless) petals or vortices. When
all the petals are open, the individual obtains a permanent link to Cosmic
Consciousness, achieving transcendence.
Since Sahasrara is the source of everything, it is also the source of all
the powers and their totality. The colour of Sahasrara is white since white is
the source of all the colours. Its other colour is violet as the first colour in
the White Light spectrum, and one following indigo. Foods that correspond
with Sahasrara are white, violet, and Lavender coloured foods. Also,
purified water, fresh air, and sunlight align us with the energy of Sahasrara,
as well as fasting, detoxing, and breathing and meditation techniques.

White Light comes into the Body of Light through Sahasrara, and
depending on how much Karma there is in the lower Chakras, this Light
gets dimmer. Therefore, the dimmer the Chakras below Sahasrara, the more
the Ego is present, and the lesser the Higher Self.
The source of the Higher Self is Sahasrara. Awakening the Kundalini
and raising it to Sahasrara will allow you to gain a direct connection with
your Higher Self. Once achieved, the Higher Self becomes your own master
and teacher for the rest of your life. There will never be a need for an
outside teacher again since you will be the teacher and student in one. The
challenge, though, is to purify the Chakras so that you can easily be guided
and taught by your Higher Self.
An open and active Sahasrara centre imparts on us the understanding
that we are Spiritual beings living a human existence and not the other way
around. Embracing our Spirituality allows us to recognize that the physical
reality is merely an illusion. Our essence is Soul and consciousness, which
are Eternal and cannot be annihilated. Spiritual people don’t regard physical
death as the end but merely the beginning of something new and different.
A Spiritual worldview creates a sort of detachment from taking this reality
too seriously, which brings joy and happiness that accompanies people who
have embraced the Spirit energy within them.
If you are closed to the Spiritual reality of things, your Sahasrara
centre is most likely inactive. You tend only to the physical body, which
makes you align with the Ego and its needs and desires. Embracing the Ego
while negating the Soul attracts lower, Demonic entities to feed off our
energy. The consciousness becomes hijacked and remains so until we
recognize that we are not separate from the world and that there is a
Spiritual reality that underlies everything.
On the other hand, an overactive Sahasrara may result in ignoring
bodily needs and overintellectualizing. If Light only pours into the higher
Chakras, there is no grounding, and the individual becomes very cerebral.
Remember, this world is an illusion but one that we need to respect since
our physical body is our vehicle for manifesting the reality we desire.
Balance of mind, body, and Soul is the key to Enlightenment, not discarding
one aspect for another.

Seven Chakras and the Nervous System

The Sushumna channel carries the Kundalini energy through the spinal
cord and into the brain. The spinal cord and brain constitute the Central
Nervous System (CNS). Emanating from the spinal cord are nerves that
reach outwards like the branches of a tree, where Sushumna acts as the
central trunk. These nerve fibres constitute the Sympathetic Nervous
System (SNS) and Parasympathetic Nervous System (PNS) which are part
of the Autonomic Nervous System (ANS).
The Autonomic Nervous System operates mainly unconsciously and
regulates essential processes such as breathing, digestion, and the beating of
the heart. For example, during a Spiritual awakening, the heart begins to
race, thus involving the Autonomic Nervous System, which is regulated by
the emotional networks in the brain.
The Sympathetic Nervous System and Parasympathetic Nervous
System do opposite things in most cases—the Sympathetic Nervous System
prepares the body for action and activity while the Parasympathetic
Nervous System enables the body to relax. The Autonomic Nervous System
is responsible for creating a healthy balance between the two, promoting a
calm and peaceful mind.
The areas where the Sympathetic Nervous System and
Parasympathetic Nervous System meet are centred around major body
organs and endocrine glands. Referred to as "Plexuses," these convergence
areas in the body's cavities form the most vital grouping of nerve cells. The
Plexuses connect the significant bodily organs to the spinal cord. These are
also the areas where the Major Chakras are located at the front of the body.
The Major Chakras interact with the physical body through the
nervous system and the endocrine glands and organs. Each Chakra is
associated with particular bodily functions, controlled by its Plexus and the
endocrine glands and organs related to it.
In the centre of each of the Major Chakras is a stem-like channel
(Figure 23). Each channel extends towards the spinal cord and merges with
it—Sushumna powers each of the Major Chakras by providing them with
their vital energy. Chakric stems bend downwards near the Pharyngeal
Plexus (Throat), Cardiac and Pulmonary Plexuses (Heart), Splenic and
Celiac Plexuses (Solar), Pelvic Plexus (Sacral) and Coccygeal and Sacral
Plexuses (Root). Above the Carotid Plexus (Mind's Eye), the Chakric stem
bends upwards, while for Sahasrara Chakra, it rises to the top of the head
through the Cerebral Cortex.

The Pharyngeal Plexus "innervates" (supplies organs or other body
parts with nerves) our palate and vocal cords. Since Vishuddhi (Throat)
Chakra governs communication and expression, it is no wonder the throat
and inside of the mouth are powered by it. Its Chakric channel extends from
the spinal cord between the second and third cervical vertebrae (C2-3) to
the centre of the throat.

Figure 23: The Seven Chakras and Nerve Plexuses
The Pulmonary Plexus is in continuity with the Cardiac Plexus—
located above the aortic of the heart, about midway in the chest. The
Cardiac Plexus innervates the heart, the organ associated with our capacity
for love and compassion and our connection with all living and non-living
things. These are all attributes of the Anahata (Heart) Chakra that powers it.
Anahata’s Chakric stem-like channel extends from the spinal cord between
the seventh cervical and first thoracic vertebrae (C7-T1) to the centre of the
chest.
Branches from the Celiac Plexus and Vagus Nerve form the Celiac
Plexus in its entirety. (More on the importance of the Vagus Nerve in a later
chapter.) Known as the Solar Plexus in scientific and Spiritual circles, the
Celiac Plexus is located at the base of the ribs near the stomach. Its nerves
innervate the pancreas, gall bladder, upper intestines, liver and stomach.
Manipura (Solar Plexus) Chakra governs our willpower, vitality, and
digestion, powered by the organs mentioned above. Its Chakric channel
extends from the spinal cord between the eighth and ninth thoracic
vertebrae (T8-9) to the centre of the upper abdomen.
The Pelvic Plexus governs the eliminative and reproductive functions
and consists of the superior and inferior Hypograstric Plexuses. The
superior Hypogastric Plexus innervates the ovaries in women and testicles
in men. Its location is in the lower abdomen, and it correlates with
Swadhisthana (Sacral) Chakra, which is associated with reproduction and
fertility.
The inferior Hypogastric Plexus is a continuation of the superior one,
located right below it in the lower pelvic region. It innervates the uterus and
cervix in women and the prostate in men. It also is connected to the rectum
and bladder. Swadhisthana’s Chakric stem-like channel extends from the

spinal cord between the first and second lumbar vertebrae (L1-2) to the
lower abdomen centre.
The Coccygeal Plexus consists of the coccygeal nerve and the fifth
sacral nerve, innervating the skin in the coccyx (tailbone) region. The
Sacral Plexus is a network of nerves that emerge from the lower lumbar and
sacral vertebrae and provide motor control to and receive sensory
information from most of the pelvis and legs. The largest nerve in the Sacral
Plexus is the Sciatic Nerve that innervates the thigh, lower leg, and foot.
Muladhara Chakra’s stem-like channel extends from the sacrum
between the third and fourth sacral vertebrae (S3-4), and it droops down to
the area between the perineum and coccyx. The Root Chakra points
downward towards the Earth as it is tasked with grounding our Chakric
system. The energy channels in the legs are our energetic connection with
the Earth Star Chakra below our feet. They also power the Ida and Pingala
Nadis, which begin in Muladhara, but get their feminine and masculine
currents through each of the leg energy channels.

Purifying the Chakras
After a full and permanent Kundalini awakening, once the Body of
Light has been built up through food intake, the next step is attuning your
consciousness to its highest aspect, the Spiritual Body. This part is
challenging because you will have to purify your lower Chakras first, which
will allow your consciousness to rise naturally. Your consciousness will be
weighed down by Karmic energy in the lower Chakras until you do so. This
process of Spiritual Ascension is systematic in this respect.
The lowest and most dense energies must be overcome before the
higher vibrational energies can permeate the Self. The negative Karmic
energy of fear is the part that keeps most of us vibrating at a lower
frequency. Since fear energy binds the Ego to the lower Four Elements,
these Elements must be purified and consecrated to allow your
consciousness to elevate and operate from the higher three Spiritual
Chakras—Vishuddhi, Ajna and Sahasrara.
Once your Body of Light is built up, you will have occasional
experiences of these rapturous states in certain moments where you lose
sight of your Ego. However, since you have to remove the clutches of the
Ego to integrate the Spiritual Body fully and absorb your consciousness into
it, the Four Elemental Chakras below the Spiritual Chakras must be worked

through. There is no other way, and you can't take any shortcuts in this
process. It may take many years, and it does in most cases, but it has to be
accomplished.
In The Magus: Kundalini and the Golden Dawn, I offer Ceremonial
Magick ritual exercises for working on the lowest four Chakras of
Muladhara, Swadhisthana, Manipura and Anahata. Whoever needs to work
on their Chakras will find this work invaluable on their journey towards
Spiritual Ascension. The Magus focuses on working with all the Chakras
and purifying them through particular ritual exercises that invoke the
Elemental energies of Earth, Water, Fire, Air, including Spirit.
Once you break down the parts of the Lower Self through working
with the Four Elements, you will have fine-tuned the corresponding aspects
of your psyche. The next step is to re-integrate those parts of the Self
through the Spirit Element. These ritual invocation techniques serve as
powerful tools to attune the Seven Chakras and raise your consciousness so
that you are channelling the maximum amount of Light energy into your
Aura.
The purpose of the ritual work with Ceremonial Magick is to gain an
everlasting connection with your Holy Guardian Angel, which is another
term for the Higher Self. It is the part of you which is of God-the Divine.
By cleansing and purifying your Chakras, you align yourself to your Higher
Self and distance yourself from your Lower Self-the Ego.
The full Kundalini awakening (whether it happened all at once or
gradually) and permanent localization of the Kundalini energy in the brain
is considered the highest achievable state of Spiritual awakening. There is
no other form of Spiritual awakening or initiation that is higher or greater in
scope. But awakening the Kundalini is merely the beginning of your
journey towards Enlightenment. The next step is purifying your Chakras
and raising the vibration of your consciousness. And to do it successfully in
a shorter period, you will need some form of Spiritual practice to aid you on
your journey.

Brain Expansion
The six Chakras, Muladhara, Swadhisthana, Manipura, Anahata,
Vishuddhi, and Ajna, have different counterparts in respective areas of the
brain (Figure 24). This means that once a Chakra is entirely opened through

a Kundalini awakening, the part of the brain associated with that Chakra
becomes permanently activated. The activation of the brain is necessary to
facilitate the expansion of consciousness. Also, as different brain areas open
up, it will begin to feel transparent and weightless, as if you are losing
touch with the Matter that comprises it. As Matter's effect drops away in
your consciousness, your brain becomes an antenna to receiving vibrations
from the outside Universe through the Crown Chakra, Sahasrara, right
above it.

Figure 24: Brain Expansion and Chakric Correspondences
As this numbing effect occurs in the brain, you begin to feel a
connection to Cosmic Consciousness. The Light inside your head is felt as a
quantifiable essence. Your inner Light is connected to the Great White
Light that is the foundation of all existence and is the essence of Cosmic
Consciousness. It is through this connection that your psychic powers
develop.
As your Body of Light optimises over time, small pockets of energy in
different areas of the brain open up, which will feel like a liquid substance
that is moving through your brain. This substance is liquid Spirit energy,
which activates and enlightens different areas of your brain. As you bring
food into your system, it transforms into Light energy, which becomes a
liquid substance in your brain area. As such, you will feel your
consciousness and your brain expanding daily. This process is similar to a
plant receiving its nutrients from the ground and developing and growing
over time. Its growth and development depend entirely on the nutrients it
gets from the ground. Sometimes there is a lot of pressure in different parts
of the brain and head as this development process occurs, resulting in
headaches. If this happens, it is a sign that you are not bringing enough
nutritious food into your system or are not eating frequently enough.
Keep in mind that what I am describing only happens if you have had
a permanent Kundalini awakening which means that this energy has risen
into your brain and resides there permanently now. As soon as this occurs,
the brain starts to become remodelled by this newfound Light permeating it.
And as mentioned, this will also be accompanied by a vibratory sound
heard inside your head whose pitch level depends on the food you bring

into your body. This is because you are now like a battery of Divine Light
energy, which is bio-electric.

Consciousness Expansion Phenomena
As the brain expands, another sense develops—the awareness of the
Silent Witness, the moment-to-moment record-keeper of reality. The Silent
Witness is the part of the Self that stands apart in consciousness and
watches the actions of the physical body as an impartial witness of it. It can
read the energy created by the body language as a quantifiable essence and
keep you informed on what you are putting out into the world with your
actions like a supercomputer.
The Silent Witness develops as the Kundalini energy expands the
brain. This new ability to perceive reality results in a complete detachment
from the Ego, as you experience yourself radically different than before the
Kundalini awakening took place. I believe that one of the major purposes of
the Kundalini transformation is to exalt the silent watcher within, the True
Self, and allow it to rise out of the physical body via the activated Kundalini
circuit and hover above you, recording your movements.
The silent observer, or Silent Witness, is the part of you which is
Spirit, which is God. It is the part of you that is pure, undifferentiated
consciousness that forms part of the Cosmic Consciousness. In reality, we
are all One and the part of us that stands aside and silently observes our
actions are the same for everyone; it is God. But with a Kundalini
awakening, there is an incredible distinction between that part of you and
your Ego. You become more attuned to the silent observer aspect of your
being than the Ego since it enables you to control your reality and manifest
your desires.
The Silent Witness watches and prompts you to go about your day and
perform your daily tasks, almost like a director who directs the movie of the
main character—you. Your notion or concept of Self uses the physical body
to accomplish the desired purpose of the Silent Witness.
When I developed this sense, I began to see outside of myself, and the
world around me began to seem like a video game, with me as the main
character. This phenomenon is ongoing and will continue to be present for
the rest of my life. It enables me to see my facial expressions and the energy
they evoke in others, and based on this perception, I can have complete
control over the type of vibrations I put out into the Universe. As such, I

have a high degree of control over what others feel in my presence since I
am navigating their emotions with my body language and the energy I put
out. As I am in this state, I am generally neutral with my feelings where
nothing gets me overly excited or down, but I am in a tranquil and balanced
state of mind.
By being in this elevated state of mind, I feel a strong connection with
sound, where everything I hear makes an impression on my consciousness.
It took some time to get used to it, and I had to re-learn how to concentrate
when I am focusing on getting something important done so that I am not
swayed by the sounds coming from my environment. I also had to
implement earplugs early on in my Kundalini transformation process since
it was difficult to induce sleep because of this powerful connection to
sound. I learned to go inwards when necessary, instead of allowing my
consciousness to project outwards, as is my natural state now.
As the years went by, my consciousness continued to expand, as did
my ability to see more from outside myself. It came to a point where I could
project high up in the clouds and look down at the world below me from a
birds’ eye point of view. To be clear, I only leave my physical body in
Spirit. Since my consciousness has expanded and has no limits or barriers
now in terms of size, I can turn my attention to anything I see before me, no
matter how far away, and connect with it through my Spirit. At that
moment, my consciousness will vault out of my physical body and project
to that spot or location. As it does so, high levels of histamine will release
into my body, numbing it temporarily and allowing my consciousness to
leave my body.
Even as my consciousness is out of my physical body, I still have
complete control over it, and I can leave the transcendental state I am in at
any moment. It is a mystical experience to project my consciousness in such
a way since I feel a sense of unity with everything I see before me. Along
with seeing Light in everything I look at, this is my favourite gift I received
from the Divine after awakening the Kundalini energy.

THE MINOR CHAKRAS
The Head Chakras
The head contains Minor Chakras that are separate from the Seven
Major Chakras. Because of where these Minor Chakras are located, they
create a crown-like pattern on the head. It is no coincidence that
representations of Spiritual figures often wear crowns on their heads in many
traditions. For example, in Christianity, Jesus Christ is often depicted
wearing a crown that alludes to him being a King of Heaven. As he said, we
can all be Kings and Queens of Heaven; meaning we can all wear this
metaphoric crown once we attain it through evolving Spiritually. The crown
also represents the attainment of the Crown Chakra, Sahasrara, the highest
Major Chakra and our connection to the Divine Light.

Figure 25: Halo Around the Head
The symbolic crown represents the awakened Chakras in the head and,
therefore, the expansion of consciousness. The halo around the head of
Jesus, the Saints, and other significant Spiritual figures, signifies that the
Spiritual crown has been activated—Sahasrara Chakra is entirely open, and

the individual consciousness has been expanded. Light in, over and around
the head represents someone who is Enlightened (Figure 25). The very term
"Enlightened" originates from this process of Light manifesting and
permeating the area around the head.
On the diagram below (Figure 26), Chakra 1 is known as the Seventh
Eye. It is an important minor Chakra on the head that, along with the Bindu
(Chakra 6), works to power the circuit of the Kundalini within the Body of
Light. These two Chakras carry the energy that connects the Self to Eternity
and Non-Duality, allowing the awakened individual to feel the rapture of the
Spiritual Realm and connection with the Divine. Also, since the Spiritual
Realm is the contact point for the Divine Realm above it, it is not uncommon
to have otherworldly experiences when Chakras 1 and 6 are active and
functioning at their maximum capacity.

Figure 26: The Minor Head Chakras (Crown)

The Bindu is likened to the "Void," or the Abyss. In the Qabalah, the
Abyss is the Eleventh Sphere of Daath on the Tree of Life, representing
death—the death of the Ego. By entering the Void, the Self finds its True or
Spiritual Self, and the duality of the mind ceases to exist. The Void of Bindu
is our entry into the Spiritual Plane of Unity. The Bindu is like a "Lake of
Fire," which unites all opposites and purifies all impurities. The mind
experiences the duality of thoughts and ideas, and through this duality, the
pain of separation is created. In the Bindu Chakra, all dual thoughts or ideas
are reconciled by their opposites. This process allows us to bypass the mind
and experience the purity and Oneness of the Spiritual realm. This energetic
mechanism has been left in us by our Creator. It marks the next stage of our
Spiritual Evolution and our return to the Garden of Eden.
Chakra 3 in the diagram is directly linked to Ida, the feminine channel
in the body, while Chakra 2 is linked to Pingala, the masculine channel.
Once Chakra 2 is completely opened, you begin to feel a connection with the
right side of the body, through which the Pingala channel flows. Over time,
the Spiritual Heart awakens, which feels like a spherical pocket of energy
through which Pingala crosses. Its location is to the right of the physical
heart. It contains a soothing flame since the Pingala Nadi is related to the
Fire Element of the Soul. As the physical heart regulates the circulation of
blood in the physical body, the Spiritual Heart governs the flow of Pranic
energy in the Body of Light. The Spiritual Heart is transcendental, and it
regulates thoughts and emotions that are of a Non-Dual quality.
Chakra 3, when fully opened, will form the connection to the left side
of the body and the feeling of openness and expansion in the physical heart.
A sense of tranquillity in your emotions characterizes it, which belong to the
Water Element. Having an open heart makes you a better feeler and receiver
of the vibrations from the outside world. In addition, it increases your
capacity for empathy.
Chakras 4 and 5 are the next ones to open during the
sublimation/transformation of Light, or Pranic energy in the body. They give
a stronger connection to the Bindu (Chakra 6) and allow the individual's
consciousness to leave the physical body when in meditation. Having these
two Chakras fully open enables the fully Kundalini awakened individual to
get absorbed in anything they view with their physical eyes when they give

it their attention. These two Chakras help individual consciousness achieve
Oneness.
You can know that the six Minor Chakras in the head are opening up
and aligning when you feel a liquid substance moving through your brain in
snake-like patterns. It infuses the channels that connect with each of the six
Minor Chakras in the head. This phenomenon is characterized by a pleasant,
tranquil feeling in your brain as it occurs.
You can know that Bindu is aligning and opening up more once
Chakras 4 and 5 are opening. Consequently, once Chakras 2 and 3 are
opening, an alignment occurs in the Seventh Eye (Chakra 1). One trinity of
Chakras works together while the other trinity also works together. For this
reason, Adepts in the Western Mysteries often wear a kippah on their heads,
containing an image of the Hexagram, or Star of David as the Hebrews call
it. The upwards and downwards triangles of the Hexagram represent the two
trinities of minor Chakras in the head.

The Foot Chakras
Along with the Seven Major Chakras that run vertically through the
body, we have a web of auxiliary energy centres, or Minor Chakras in the
feet and the hands, that provide a broad spectrum of energy influx into our
system. Unfortunately, the Minor Chakras in the feet and hands are often
ignored and neglected by Spiritual teachers even though they serve a crucial
role in the energy framework of our bodies.
Each toe, including the middle of the foot and heel area, is governed by
one of the Major Chakras (Figure 27). The big toe corresponds with
Manipura, index toe with Anahata, the middle toe with Vishuddhi, the fourth
toe to Ajna, the little toe with Swadhisthana, the middle of the sole to
Sahasrara, and the back of the heel with Muladhara.
One of the functions of the toes is to discharge excess energy that has
been accumulated in the Major Chakras through our regular, daily activities
and body functions. This surplus energy is released and transmitted into the
Earth, facilitating grounding in our consciousness. When the Minor Chakras
in the feet function well and are in harmony with the Major Chakras, there is
a constant connection and flow of communication between Earth energy
grids and our energies.
As per their location and connection with the Earth, the Foot Chakras
also serve to channel energy from the Transpersonal Earth Star Chakra

(below the feet) and transmit it into the Major Chakras via the energy
channels in the legs. In this case, the Foot Chakras serve as energy conduits
or connectors that allow the Earth Star to be in direct communication not
only with Muladhara Chakra but with the other Major Chakras as well.

Figure 27: The Foot Chakras
The Foot Chakras also help facilitate the balancing and assimilation of
the Kundalini energy that comes from the Earth through its magnetic
currents. They work as energy transformers, regulating the quantity and
intensity of energy coming into the Body of Light from the Earth.
The "Sole" Chakra is located in the middle of the foot and is related to
Sahasrara, the Crown. The Sole Chakra is the most important of the Foot
Chakras. If we examine its structure, we can see that its six secondary points
directly reflect the Minor Chakras in the head, related to Sahasrara.
The relation between the Sole Chakra and Sahasrara is best described
by the axiom of "As Above, So Below." These two sets of Chakras allow the
initiate to have their feet on the Earth and their head in Heaven
simultaneously. Interestingly, the feet symbolize the duality of the World of
Matter, while the head represents the singularity of the Spiritual Realm.
Another important Foot Chakra is the Heel Chakra, related to
Muladhara. This Minor Chakra helps us feel grounded since our heels are

the first ones that touch the Earth every time we take a step. The Heel
Chakra is directly connected to Muladhara via the energy channels in the
legs. The primary energy channels in the legs power the feminine and
masculine Ida and Pingala Nadis that begin in Muladhara. In men, Ida and
Pingala are energized by the testes, while in women, by the ovaries.
Numerous other Nadis run alongside the primary energy channels in the
legs, connecting the toes to other Major Chakras.

The Hand Chakras
The Seven Major Chakras find their correspondence in the feet but also
the hands (Figure 28). The thumb corresponds with Manipura, index finger
with Anahata, middle finger with Vishuddhi, ring finger with Muladhara,
little finger with Swadhisthana, middle of the palm to Sahasrara, and wrist
point to Ajna Chakra.
The Chakras are perfectly balanced on the hand as the ring and little
fingers are feminine in quality while the thumb and index finger are
masculine. Moreover, a central line runs from the wrist point through the
middle of the palm and up to the middle finger, corresponding with the Spirit
Element, which reconciles the opposing gender principles.
Hand Chakras are essential for healing and receiving energetic
information from the Universe. Our hands allow us to interact with the world
on both a physical and energetic level. The fingers serve as sensors while the
palms serve to channel healing energy. Your dominant hand sends out energy
while the non-dominant hand receives it.
While the feet relate to the Earth Element and the physical body, the
hands correspond with the Air Element and the mind since they are literally
suspended in the air before us. As such, the Hand Chakras very much affect
the information that comes into our minds.
For this reason, society has adopted the handshake as the primary
greeting between people. By shaking someone’s hand, your palms touch,
allowing you to intuit who they are as a person since you make direct contact
with their energy.

Figure 28: The Hand Chakras
The middle of the palm contains an essential Minor Chakra, which is
related to Sahasrara, the Crown. Otherwise called the "Palm" Chakra, it is
the most important of our Hand Chakras since it is used for healing
purposes. You will notice that the Palm Chakra mirrors the Sole Chakra,
which reflects the Minor Chakras at the top of the head. All three sets of
Chakras correspond with Sahasrara and the Spirit Element. Their function is
crucial in the Kundalini transformation process since they infuse the Spirit
energy into the body.
The Hand Chakras are connected to the Throat Chakra, Vishuddhi, via
the energy channels in the arms. Therefore, to fully open the Hand Chakras
and maximize their functional abilities, one must awaken the Throat Chakra
as it is the first Chakra of the Spirit Element. The Spirit Element also
includes the two Chakras above Vishuddhi, Ajna and Sahasrara.
Healing energy is generated in Anahata, which is sent out through the
Palm Chakras via Vishuddhi (Figure 29). The Throat Chakra is used to intuit
the energetic impressions around you because of its connection with Ajna
Chakra, the psychic centre, which has a corresponding energy point in the
wrist area. These impressions are often received through the Hand Chakras,
which we can use like energy sensors through intention alone.

Figure 29: Healing Energy Generation and Transmission (Palms)
Awareness and activation of the Hand Chakras can make a significant
difference in the quality of your life. The average person has the Minor
Chakras in their hands open to some extent meaning that healing energy is
continually flowing in and out of them. Only people who are entirely turned
to evil will be completely closed off from healing energy until they can
reopen their hearts to love and goodness again. Then there are those people
who have outstripped the masses concerning Spiritual evolution. These
people have their Heart and Throat Chakras fully open. Their consciousness
is much higher in the degree of vibration, which means that their Hand
Chakras are optimally functioning and sending out and receiving healing
energy.
A fully Kundalini awakened person will have all of their Chakras open,
including the Hand and Foot Chakras. They will be natural healers, empaths
and telepaths. Much of the outside information comes in through the hands.
The mere act of touching an object will result in receiving energetic
knowledge about that object. When the Hand Chakras are fully open, the
fingertips become extra sensitive to receiving information and sending it into
the body for evaluation.

Healing with the Hands
The Hand Chakras can be used to receive energy but also to send it out;
it all depends on your intention. When you are receiving energy, the
fingertips are involved, while when you are sending it out, you do so mainly
through the Palm Chakras (Figure 30).
The most common use for the receiving function in the Hand Chakras is
to scan the Aura of an individual and look for "hot spots" and other
information that can help you intuit the state of their overall energy. The
Hand Chakras can willingly be used as sensors that inform you what the
energy is like in your environment.
You can use the sending function of the Hand Chakras to channel
healing energy to someone, clear the room of stagnant energy, charge a
Crystal or another object, or even bless or offer protection to an individual or
group of people. You can also use your energy to heal yourself and your

Chakras, although this could be draining. It helps to heal oneself using a
Gemstone instead, for example.
Although it is crucial to know how to build up your chi in your Hara
Chakra (more on this in the following chapter on Transpersonal Chakras), it
is far more efficacious for healing work to learn how to bring in the Spiritual
energy and allow it to flow through you. As long as you are coming from a
mental place of unconditional love (a characteristic of Anahata Chakra),
your intention alone should be enough for you to call in the Spiritual energy
and channel it through your Hand Chakras for healing purposes.
It is essential to remain neutral regarding specific outcomes from your
healing session and not impose your will. For most of the healing session,
you are merely making yourself into a channel, a conduit of Spiritual energy.
Therefore, you should only involve your Higher Will when moving and
removing energy blockages. To do so, you can either comb the area in the
Aura that contains negative energy or push out this negative energy with
healing energy from your Palm Chakras. In the latter, you can intensify the
magnitude of the healing energy channelled through your Palm Chakras by
employing your willpower and focused attention.

Figure 30: Healing Energy from the Hands

Infusion of Spirit Energy
The purpose of the Kundalini purification process is to make your body
a vessel for the Spirit. Of course, nothing happens to your physical body
during this process, although it feels like it does to your consciousness. The
Kundalini allows your consciousness to rise as high as the Spiritual Body
and align with its vibration by purging the Chakras.
The body must be infused by the Spirit energy carried out by the Sole
and Palm Chakras. These Minor Chakras become fully activated once the
Kundalini reaches Sahasrara in the process of awakening. It usually takes
some time for the consciousness to prepare itself for the infusion of Spirit
since the Chakras require cleansing. Once it is ready, though, the Spirit
energy rises into the body via the Sole and Palm Chakras. This experience
feels like a gust of wind has entered the limbs and made them feel
transparent. This Divine breath can then permeate the torso entirely, enabling
the individual consciousness to feel weightlessness in the body, especially
the arms and legs. It feels like the physical body has become hollow from
the inside to the experiencer.
When the Spirit comes into the body, the individual begins to
experience the overall numbness of the whole body. It again takes some time
for this part of the Kundalini transformation to manifest. As I mentioned
before, it was in year seven of the awakening that this took place for me. It
felt like the physical body had received a permanent shot of Novocaine, a
numbing agent.
The numbness sensation occurs so that the consciousness can lose its
connection with the physical body, making it easier for it to localize within
the Body of Light fully. By losing consciousness of the physical body, the
Soul is ultimately released from its shackles. The individual consciousness is
united with Cosmic Consciousness, ending the pain of division between the
two.

The Psychic Eyes
Besides the two physical eyes, there are five additional Spiritual eyes in
our heads (Figure 31) that give us expanded awareness when our
consciousness is heightened. Also, the two physical eyes have functions
beyond ordinary seeing abilities worth mentioning. The right eye is
primarily used to see the forms of objects; it aids in the perception of detail.

The left eye relates to our emotional Self. It gives us a sense of the
relationship between objects through their colour and texture.
The Third Eye, or Mind's Eye, is located slightly above and between
the eyebrows. It serves as an energy portal that allows us to intuit the
energetic form of the objects in our Third Dimension. The Third Eye gives
us insight into the Unknown as our window into the Astral World. The actual
location of Ajna Chakra, though, is in the centre of the brain, in the Third
Ventricle area, as will be discussed in a later chapter. The psychic eyes
described below have auxiliary functions to the Mind's Eye. They serve as
energy portals, each with specific powers that, when awakened, give us
expanded awareness and understanding since they are distinct components
of Ajna Chakra as a whole.
The Fourth Eye is right above the Third Eye, and it allows us to
comprehend the relationships between people while promoting belief in the
Creator. It is the higher sense of what the left physical eye perceives as it
enables us to understand the Source of Creation. The Fourth Eye is the
builder of faith.
The Fifth Eye is right in the middle of the forehead, and it aids in our
understanding of Universal truths and ideals. Through it, we receive
concepts of the workings of Universal Laws that govern reality. It allows us
to see the larger picture of life and our place within it. The Fifth Eye
activates the higher mind and our creative thinking. It also allows us to view
our past lives.

Figure 31: Location of the Psychic Eyes
The Sixth Eye is right above the Fifth Eye, and its function is to give us
true inner sight and the understanding of our Soul's purpose. The Seventh
Eye is right where the hairline is, on the opposite side of the Bindu. It aids in
understanding the totality and purpose of the Universe as a whole. We can
communicate with Angelic Beings from the Divine Plane of existence
through it.

The Seventh Eye is paramount in the Kundalini transformation process
since it acts as the exit point of the Kundalini, the same as the Bindu. The
Seventh Eye and the Bindu act like funnels for the Kundalini circuit when
fully active and integrated. If there is a blockage in the Seventh Eye, the
Kundalini circuit becomes inactive, and one loses touch with the Bindu and
the Spiritual and Divine Planes of existence.
It is crucial to understand that all of the psychic eyes develop over time
when undergoing a Kundalini transformation after a full awakening. Once
they are all created and consciousness gains the ability to utilize their
functions, the Fifth Eye becomes the "command centre" of the
consciousness, instead of the Third Eye, since it is the middle of the five
psychic eyes and can receive impressions from each of them.
There is another psychic centre called the "Subconscious Eye", and it
lies right between the two physical eyes, at the bridge of the nose. The
subconscious mind is the centre of our primitive and basic living and gutlevel feelings. Its function is survival; thus, it relates to the necessities in life,
such as food, water, and shelter. Fear also plays a crucial part in survival as
we learn to avoid those things that can hurt us, either physically or
emotionally. The subconscious mind becomes a storehouse of all those
things that caused us pain over time, containing the fear energy that limits us
in life.
Once the Kundalini has entered the brain and pierced Ajna Chakra, the
Subconscious Eye is fully awakened. Since a full Kundalini awakening
bridges the conscious and subconscious minds, all the negative energy stored
in the subconscious is released to be dealt with and transformed. As such,
the Subconscious Eye allows us to see everything that used to be hidden
from us psychically.
The Subconscious Eye allows us to see the workings of the
subconscious mind to become more efficient Co-Creators with our Creator.
Once we overcome the negative energy stored in the subconscious mind, we
can utilize this psychic centre to mould our thoughts, making us masters of
our realities. However, the Subconscious Eye is merely a window, or portal
into the subconscious mind, whose location is at the back of the head. In
contrast, the conscious part of the mind is at the front of the head.

THE TRANSPERSONAL CHAKRAS
According to many Spiritual schools of thought, other than the Major
and Minor Chakras, there are also Transpersonal Chakras. These are Chakras
outside of the Light Body that the human being is connected to energetically.
Transpersonal means that they transcend the realms of the incarnated
personality. Also, in Chakric science, they add the second, crucial piece of
the puzzle, next to the Major and Minor Chakras, in understanding our
energetic makeup.
The primary purpose of the Transpersonal Chakras is to connect the
physical body and the Major and Minor Chakras to other people, Ethereal
Beings and other sources of Divine and higher energies. Most Spiritual
schools of thought say there are five Transpersonal Chakras, although this
number may vary. It is also common to see many Chakric systems use only
the two opposite Transpersonal Chakras, the Soul Star and the Earth Star.
The Transpersonal Chakras exist along the Hara Line, which is an
energetic column that contains the seven primary Chakras. When we extend
this energetic column upwards and downwards, past the seven primary
Chakras, we encounter various Transpersonal Chakras above Sahasrara and
one below Muladhara called the Earth Star Chakra (Figure 32).
The Transpersonal Chakras hold the keys to the Spiritual development
and understanding of the dynamics of Creation. Through the Chakras above
Sahasrara, we can connect with the more subtle vibrations in the Cosmos. In
The Magus, I have referred to these higher vibratory states of consciousness
as the Divine Planes of existence.
In terms of the Qabalistic Tree of Life, the Transpersonal Chakras
around and above the head area are part of the Kether Sephira and not within
the Three Veils of Negative Existence (Ain Soph Aur). And since Kether is
the White Light, these Transpersonal Chakras deal with how this Light
filters into the Body of Light and the Seven Major Chakra centres.
Unless your Seven Major Chakras are adequately balanced and your
vibration is heightened, I highly discourage you from attempting to work
with the three highest Transpersonal Chakras. Trying to use these potent
power sources before making yourself into a proper conduit will be futile
since you won’t be able to access their power. As such, save working with
these higher Chakras for once you have sufficiently developed yourself

Spiritually. The only Transpersonal Chakra that you can work with safely is
the Earth Star since this Chakra relates to grounding.

Figure 32: The Transpersonal Chakras

Earth Star Chakra
The Earth Star Chakra, Vasundhara (Sanskrit for "Daughter of the
Earth"), is approximately six inches below the feet. Otherwise called the
"Super-Root", this Chakra assists in grounding and connecting us to Planet
Earth since it makes direct contact with the ground. The Earth Star acts as a
bridge between our consciousness and the collective consciousness of Planet
Earth. Thus, this Chakra deals with nature awareness. The Foot Chakras are
the medium of communication between the Major Chakras and the Earth
Star.
The Earth Star also enables us to connect with the denser terrestrial
energies of our Planet. The terrestrial/telluric energy rises through the legs'
energetic channels via the Foot Chakras until it reaches the Root Chakra,
Muladhara. Muladhara Chakra is the foundation of our Chakric system, its
root—hence how this Chakra got its name. Muladhara and the Earth Star
have a direct relationship—they are both related to the Element of Earth and
serve to channel its energy. Qabalistically, their function corresponds with
the Sephira Malkuth, placed directly at the feet. However, the Earth Star
represents the Spiritual aspect of Earth, vibrating at the Fourth Dimension of
Vibration or Energy.
The Earth Star is essential to anchor us to the Physical Plane of
existence. One of the functions of the Earth Star is to root the personal and
transpersonal parts of the Soul to the magnetic core of Planet Earth through
its electromagnetic field. Since the human being's energy system can be
likened to a tree, the Earth Star serves as its roots.
The Earth Star allows us to stay grounded despite all day-to-day
activities that unground us. Having a solid connection with this Chakra
enables us to remain firm in our life's purpose and not be swayed by the
thoughts and emotions of other people around us. These external energies
are cleared out from our Aura when our connection with our Earth Star is
strong. As such, our relationship with our Earth Star gives our Soul security
for it to express itself and its purpose.
The Earth Star has its own Auric layer extending past the Sahasrara
Chakra layer. It serves as an Etheric blueprint connecting the in-between
Auric layers to our Lower Astral Body (Etheric Body), the first Subtle Body
beyond the Physical Plane. Due to its placement below the feet, this Chakra

grounds the Subtle Bodies and the entire Chakric system, including the
Transpersonal Chakras above Sahasrara.
The Earth Star is also directly involved in stimulating the Kundalini
into activity because of its relationship with Muladhara. Without its
assistance, the awakening process would be impossible since human
consciousness is inextricably linked with Earth consciousness. Changes in
Earth consciousness affect human consciousness on a collective and
personal level.
For a Kundalini awakening to occur, we must create a powerful energy
current in Muladhara Chakra. Creating this energy begins in the Earth Star
since these two Earth Element Chakras work together. In other words,
energy in Muladhara is generated from the Earth Star Chakra. The Earth Star
acts as a battery for Muladhara; it sends Planetary energies into it via the
positive and negative currents represented by the two energy channels in the
legs.
Our life story is recorded inside the matrix of our Earth Star. This
Chakra is responsible for our personal development on the material plane
and the paths we take to move forward in life. It embraces all of our
Ancestral history and DNA patterns. This Chakra is also the record keeper of
all past life incarnations and Karmic lessons learned.
The Earth Star connects us with all of humanity on a terrestrial level.
When balanced, this Chakra allows us to feel a deep connection with our
inherent inner powers and work for a greater cause. Earth Star's ultimate
goal is to further the collective consciousness of our Planet and the Universe
we are a part of. A balanced Earth Star also allows us to feel grounded,
protected, and secure as our Divine connection with Mother Earth (Gaia) is
strengthened.
An unbalanced Earth Star creates mental and emotional instability in
life. By being ungrounded with Mother Earth, we lose touch with our
Spirituality, making us lose our sense of purpose over time. On a physical
level, an unbalanced Earth Star can cause problems with the legs, knees,
ankles and hips since these parts of our body ground us with Mother Earth.
The colour of the Earth Star is black, brown, or magenta (when
activated). Gemstones attributed to this Chakra are Smoky Quartz, Onyx,
Black Obsidian, and Magnetite (Lodestone).

Hara Chakra (Navel)

Hara is a Japanese word that means "sea of energy." Its name is fitting
since Hara Chakra acts as a gateway into the Astral Plane. Through this
Plane, one can access all the inner Cosmic Planes. As such, Hara Chakra is
our access to the infinite ocean of energy in the Universe. It is not
necessarily a Chakra but is in a league of its own because of its size and
scope. However, Hara is part of the Transpersonal Chakras model in many
New Age Chakric systems. Its location is between Swadhisthana and
Manipura, at the belly button (Figure 33), about two inches inwards.
Around the Hara is an Etheric ball of energy, about the size of a soccer
ball, called the "Dantian," or "Tan Tien." The Dantian's energy is chi, qi,
mana, Prana, which is Life energy. This ball of energy interacts with the
nearby organs involved in food processing since ingested food transforms
into Life energy, whose essence is Light energy. This energy is filled from
the Hara, as that is its centre. Once Light Energy is generated in the Dantian
through the Hara Chakra, it is then distributed throughout the body.
Hara Chakra has a direct relationship with Swadhisthana since it acts as
a portal into the Astral Plane and a generator of Life energy. The distinction
between the two is that Swadhisthana's function is to generate sexual energy
(along with Muladhara), while Hara generates Life energy. In reality, though,
the two work together as a battery, just like Muladhara works with the Earth
Star Chakra. On the Tree of Life, the function of Hara and Swadhisthana
Chakras corresponds with the Sephira Yesod.

Figure 33: The Hara (Navel) Chakra

Hara Chakra gives us sustenance and strength, which is dependent on
Muladhara and the Earth Star being sufficiently grounded. Our source of
power is in the Hara and our regenerative ability. While the Earth Star and
Muladhara Chakras are drawing up the Earth energies, the Hara uses the
sexual energy of Swadhisthana to power the will. To achieve this, it uses the
raw Fire energy of Manipura, which lies directly above it. Manipura is
directly involved in the process of transforming ingested food into Light
energy. Many Spiritual traditions recognize the existence of Hara Chakra but
cannot distinguish whether it is related to Swadhisthana or Manipura, or both
—as is the case.
The efficiency of Hara Chakra is also dependent on how well the Earth
Star and Root Chakra are grounded. These two Chakras draw in the Earth's
energies, while the Hara uses that energy, along with the energy from
Swadhisthana and Manipura Chakras, to power the entire energy system.
Hara Chakra is essentially our core and foundation. Its colour is amber, as it
is a mix of the yellow of Manipura and orange of Swadhisthana.
Although Swadhisthana is often referred to as the Navel Chakra in
Spiritual traditions, Hara is the actual Navel Chakra because of its placement
and function. As a fetus, we were all fed through the navel as our Subtle
Bodies were being formed. Once we were born and the umbilical cord was
cut, we were cut off from the Etheric source of energy. As such, we stopped
drawing in energy through the Hara. Through conditioning and the forming
of the Ego, we lost sight of this portal and began channelling energy into our
heads from overthinking. To remedy this, we should focus on our core and
draw in energy through our Hara Chakra, which will expand our Dantian.
Hara and the Dantian (Tan Tien) are often referred to in Qigong, Tai
Chi and other martial arts. All martial arts disciplines that attempt to work
with energy realize the power of the Hara centre and building up the
Dantian, which they consider the centre of gravity. But to do so, one must
have a firm connection with their Etheric Body; otherwise, they will be
unable to channel their inner energies. In many of these martial arts systems,
the Hara is only one of the Dantiens, referred to as the Lower Dantian. The
Middle Dantian is in the heart area (Anahata), while the Upper Dantian is in
the head area, at the level of Ajna Chakra. This breakdown of three main
energy centres in the human body allows martial artists to best use the
natural flow of their energies to optimize their fighting power.

Hara Chakra must be open and the Dantian (Lower) full of energy if
one is to have good health and an abundance of vitality. If the Hara is closed
or inactive, it can cause many addictions, especially to food. Overeating is
an attempt to feel full despite having the Hara blocked and the Dantian
empty. Tantric Sex practice is one way to open the Hara and become aware
of your Dantian. Tantric Sex focuses energy into the abdomen, incorporating
the use of our sexual energy as well as our willpower, thereby involving both
Swadhisthana and Manipura Chakras.

Causal Chakra (Bindu)
The Bindu serves as the gateway to the Causal Chakra, which is
approximately two to three inches away from the top back of the head once
you project a straight line from the Thalamus (Figure 34). Then, it lines up
with Sahasrara Chakra, which lies directly in front of it. The Causal Chakra
is one of the three Transpersonal Celestial Chakras around the head area,
including the Soul Star and the Stellar Gateway.
The Bindu at the top-back of the skull (from the inside) acts as a
doorway to the Causal Chakra. The Bindu is the door, while the Causal
Chakra is the house. You can’t have the door without the house, though, nor
the house without the door—the two go together. For this reason, the
characteristics of the Bindu Chakra mirror those of the Causal Chakra in the
Transpersonal Chakras model.
The Causal Chakra is concerned with eradicating the Ego and
transforming the personality. It gives us the notion of the continuity of life
beyond physical death. We are Eternal Beings of Light that will continue
living past this momentary physical existence. This Chakra serves to silence
the Ego and make the mind still, enabling the individual to explore the
Spiritual Plane and the Divine Planes.
The Causal Chakra is a point of entry into the Divine Planes, which can
be experienced through the Soul Star and the Stellar Gateway Chakras that
lie above the Crown Chakra. Causal Chakra also assists in the higher
activations of the Spiritual Chakras (Crown, Mind’s Eye, and Throat), which
facilitate the exploration of the Spiritual Plane.

Figure 34: The Causal/Bindu Chakra

Since the Causal/Bindu Chakra is referred to as the Moon Chakra, it is
feminine in quality. When awakened, the feminine qualities of love,
compassion, creativity, and intuition are heightened in the individual. This
Chakra absorbs and radiates the Lunar Light, thereby illuminating the
thoughts we receive directly from the Cosmic Consciousness.
Through the Causal Chakra, we receive information from the Divine
Planes and the higher Spiritual Plane; information that can only be accessed
when we are detached from our Ego and personality. As such, one of the
main properties of this Chakra is that it allows us to explore higher wisdom
and mysteries of the Cosmos.
The Causal Chakra vibrates at the Fourth Dimension, the Dimension of
Vibration or Energy. It receives the energies from the two Fifth Dimensional
Chakras above the head (Soul Star and Stellar Gateway) and filters them into
the Aura. The Causal/Bindu Chakra is our link with those two higher
frequency Chakras as it allows us to accept the gradating dosages of White
Light that the Divine Planes emit.
Higher Spiritual Beings from the Divine Realms can communicate to us
through the Causal Chakra. As information comes in through this Chakra, it
is brought into the lower Chakras, where we can access it through the Subtle
Bodies respective to those particular Planes.
The Causal Chakra plays the most crucial role in the Kundalini
awakening process, as its opening results in enhanced clarity of psychic and
telepathic communication. It enables the individual to "read" the energy
around them through their intuitional capacity. The Causal/Bindu Chakra
works with Ajna Chakra to accomplish this feat. The individual uses the
various Mind’s Eye portals to "see" the information that is being channelled
into the Causal Chakra from the Cosmic Consciousness.
The Causal/Bindu Chakra naturally opens and stays open as part of the
Kundalini transformation process. When this Chakra is unlocked, and the
mind and Ego are silenced, our Higher God-Self can communicate to us
directly. This communication is an immediate process that doesn’t require
any conscious effort. The individual gets absorbed in meditation from one
waking moment to the next and becomes a living embodiment of the unity of
all existence. However, this experience only happens when the Kundalini
has been awakened and raised to Sahasrara Chakra.
Although you can access the energies of the Causal/Bindu Chakra
through different Spiritual practices (such as the use of Gemstones), the only

way to open it and keep it open permanently is through a Kundalini
awakening. As mentioned, Kundalini’s two exit points are the Bindu and the
Seventh Eye centre. Once the Kundalini system is active in the Body of
Light after the awakening, the Bindu regulates the Light energy that
circulates within it, nourishing the Seventy-Two Thousand Nadis or energy
channels. As these channels get infused with Light energy, consciousness
expands. The Bindu opens further, allowing the individual to streamline
more information from the Spiritual Plane and the Divine Planes above.
The Causal/Bindu Chakra is white, suggesting a deep and intimate
connection with the Spirit Element and the Moon. Gemstones attributed to
this Chakra are Moonstone, Angel Aura Quartz, Celestite, Kyanite, and
Herderite.

Soul Star Chakra
The Soul Star Chakra, Vyapini (Sanskrit for "All-Pervading"), is
located about six inches above the top of the head, lining up directly with the
Crown Chakra below it (Figure 35). The colour of this Chakra is goldenwhite. The Soul Star serves as our connection with the Cosmic energies of
our Solar System, while the Stellar Gateway serves as our connection with
the Milky Way Galaxy as a whole. The Soul Star also moderates the very
high vibrational energy from the Stellar Gateway and beams it down (via the
Causal Chakra) into the Seven Major Chakras within the Body of Light. As
such, we are enabled to assimilate these galactic energies into our physical
existence.
The Soul Star Chakra is of the Fifth Dimensional frequency,
representing the energy of love, truth, compassion, peace, and Spiritual
wisdom and awareness. It corresponds with the lowest Divine Plane of
existence. According to Ascension teachings, the Earth and humanity are in
the process of shifting into a whole new level of reality, which is the Fifth
Dimension.
We can only experience the Cosmic energies of the Fifth Dimension
through the unity of individual consciousness with Cosmic Consciousness.
When one achieves this connection, they gain access to the Akashic records,
a memory-bank within Cosmic Consciousness that contains all the human
events, thoughts, emotions, and intentions of the past, present, and future. As
such, one becomes a clairvoyant, psychic, or seer. Therefore, part of the
Kundalini transformation process is fully activating the Bindu/Causal

Chakra, which connects us with the Soul Star and Stellar Gateway, allowing
us to become one with Cosmic Consciousness.
The Soul Star Chakra is where we connect with our Higher God-Self.
However, this connection is integrated through the Causal/Bindu Chakra and
the Spirit Chakras (Vishuddhi, Ajna, and Sahasrara). These Chakras serve to
ground the experience of connecting with our Higher Self. As the Soul Star
represents Divinity in all its forms, it partakes of unconditional love,
Spiritual selflessness and compassion, and unity in all things. It is the origin
of our quest for Ascension and Enlightenment.
As the Causal/Bindu Chakra is referred to as the Moon Chakra, the
Soul Star would be our Sun Chakra since it is the origin of our Souls. It has
an intimate connection with the Star of our Solar System (the Sun) and
Manipura Chakra, the Seat of the Soul and the Sun of the Light Body.
Hence, where the Soul Star gets the golden aspect of its colour, which is a
higher vibration of the yellow colour of Manipura.
Since the Soul Star corresponds with the Divine Plane, it is above
Karmic energy since Karma belongs to the Lower Planes of existence. The
Soul Star regulates the Karma of the Soul, though, by imparting the
necessary life lessons through Manipura Chakra and the Fire Element. These
Karmic energies have built up through many lifetimes, and they block us
from manifesting our desires. Therefore, by developing our willpower, we
enlighten Manipura Chakra and gain a stronger connection with our Soul
Star.
The Soul Star works with the Stellar Gateway, allowing us to see the
Cosmic connectedness between ourselves and the Universe we live in. When
the Soul Star is in alignment with the Chakras below, we feel a strong sense
of purpose and a zest for life. The Soul Star is our True Will in life and the
bridge between our impersonal essence and the personal, physical reality.
To avoid being spaced out and ungrounded, one must activate the Earth
Star before working with the Soul Star. Those who spend too much time
working on their higher Transpersonal Chakras while ignoring the Earth Star
will be too spacey and ethereal. The Soul Star and Earth Star function
together to accomplish the work of the central Star of our Solar System—the
Sun. Gemstones attributed to the Soul Star are Selenite, Kyanite, Nirvana
Quartz, and Danburite.

Figure 35: The Transpersonal Chakras Above the Crown

Stellar Gateway
The Stellar Gateway Chakra, Vyomanga (Sanskrit for "Heavenly
Being"), is about twelve inches above the top of the head, directly above the
Soul Star and Crown Chakra (Figure 35). The colour of this Chakra is pure

gold or rainbow (when activated). The Stellar Gateway, as its name implies,
is a doorway or portal to the Stars of the Milky Way Galaxy. Simply put, it is
the Chakra of Cosmic Consciousness.
The Stellar Gateway is the highest in vibration from all the
Transpersonal Chakras. It is the highest of the Fifth Dimensional Chakras
and our ultimate connection with the source of all of Creation. The Stellar
Gateway corresponds with the higher Divine Planes of existence.
The Fifth Dimension represents conscious Oneness with the Creator
(Godhead). The Soul Star gives us the understanding that we have Eternal
Souls, which originate from the central Star (the Sun) in our Solar System.
However, the Stellar Gateway gives us the understanding that our Eternal
Souls originate from the same source as other Souls from other Solar
Systems in our Milky Way Galaxy. Thus, the Stellar Gateway represents the
highest level of the Fifth Dimension, which is Oneness with all Sparks of
Light in the Galaxy.
The Fifth Dimension is the very source of the White Light we all
partake of. It not only unites us with terrestrial Beings but Extraterrestrial
Beings as well. No matter what Solar System you are from, we are all One
since our Creator is the same, and so is the Cosmic Hologram we all
participate in. As such, the Fifth Dimension relates to ultimate peace and
harmony between all things and the Divine love energy that connects
everything.
The Stellar Gateway is a Spiritual barometer that moderates the
intensity of White Light that pours into our Aura. The Soul Star is the filter
through which the Light is measured, while the Earth Star grounds this Light
and our consciousness to the consciousness of Planet Earth.
The Stellar Gateway is humanity’s Interstellar connection, which is
timeless. As it is timeless, it holds all of our experiences from all our past
lives. So whenever you recall a past life, you connect with the Stellar
Gateway Chakra.
The Stellar Gateway is the apex of the Kundalini transformation
experience and the highest state of consciousness attainable by human
beings. This Chakra emits the highest vibrational energies that human
virtues are built upon. Enlightenment is only achievable once the individual
fully connects with the Stellar Gateway Chakra. Gemstones attributed to the
Stellar Gateway are Moldavite, Stellar Beam Calcite, Azeztulite, and
Selenite.

The Hara Line
The Hara Line is a major energy conduit connecting the Transpersonal
Chakras column. It is a channel that allows Light energy to pass from the
Stellar Gateway to the Soul Star, into the Causal Chakra, down to the Hara
Chakra and connect with the Earth Star below the feet. This energy passes
through the central part of the human body, along the Sushumna channel,
where the Seven Major Chakras are located.
The Hara Line aims to bring Light into the Seven Major Chakras
through the Causal Chakra and into Sahasrara. This Light is then distributed
throughout the lower six Major Chakras. Finally, the Hara Chakra collects
this Light and sends it down through the perineum (Muladhara Chakra) to
the Earth Star, thereby connecting the Major Chakras and the Transpersonal
Chakras.
The Hara line also directs the flow of energy in the Major Chakras.
Since each of our Seven Major Chakras takes in and gives out energy to
Chakras above and below, the Hara Line serves as an invisible axis that
subtly directs and distributes the flow of that energy.
The Hara Chakra serves as the centre of the Hara Line energy conduit
since it is the container of Life energy (Prana, chi, qi, mana). The Hara Line
is wholly activated and invigorated when the Kundalini is awakened and
risen to the Crown Chakra. The Kundalini serves as the force that connects
the Transpersonal Chakras with the Major Chakras. This connection is then
anchored to Mother Earth (Gaia) through the Earth Star.
Since the Hara Line is concerned with channelling Light energy into the
Major Chakras and then distributing it, it is the essence of our Divinity. This
Light energy is guided by the Soul Star Chakra, our Divine essence. The
Soul uses the Hara Line axis as a freeway, ascending and descending the
Light energy from one Chakra to the next. The Soul Star serves as the
command (control) centre to accomplish this task.
When the Transpersonal Chakras and Seven Major Chakras are
adequately balanced, an Alchemical phenomenon occurs where all of the
Chakras are unified and fused as one. This occurrence on an energetic level
represents the highest point of Enlightenment. For this experience to occur,
both the Soul Star and Earth Star must be activated and working together.
These two Transpersonal Chakras work like the negative and positive poles
of a battery, where Light energy is bounced back and forth between them.

The Fifth Dimension
Most religions and Spiritual traditions agree that the Fifth Dimension is
the highest realm a Soul can reach and the final frontier in human
consciousness. The Fifth Dimension is the dimension of the White Light that
underlies all of manifested Creation. It is the "Mind of God," otherwise
called Cosmic Consciousness. Our manifested Universe exists within this
White Light, which is limitless, timeless, and Eternal.
The White Light is the First Mind, while the manifested Universe is the
Second Mind. In reality, the two are One, as the Forms in the Second Mind
depend on the Force projected from the First Mind to give them life. The
White Light is the Kether Sephira on the Tree of Life, which depends on
Chokmah (Force) and Binah (Form) for Creation to manifest. These two
Sephiroth manifest Soul and consciousness in the Universe.
The White Light is the Source of love, truth, and wisdom. We incarnate
on this Planet as luminous Beings of Light, but over time, as our Ego
develops, we lose touch with our Soul and our Spiritual powers. As our
consciousness devolves, it becomes imperative that we get back in touch
with our Souls so that we can Spiritually rise again and realize our full
potential. Awakening the Kundalini is our method of achieving Spiritual
Realization. Our Creator left the Kundalini trigger in us by design. Most
people are unaware of this fact, which is why people like me serve as
messengers of the Kundalini energy's existence and potential.
A full Kundalini awakening activates the Seven Major Chakras, each of
which resonates with the vibration of one of the colours of the rainbow. We
find these rainbow colours when we shine White Light through a prism. We
have red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, and violet, in sequence.
When the Kundalini rises through the spinal column and into the brain,
it seeks to reach the Crown Chakra and break open the Cosmic Egg. Doing
so activates the Seventy-Two Thousand Nadis of the Body of Light, thereby
awakening all of its latent potential. As all the petals of Sahasrara open with
the Kundalini's upwards rise, the individual consciousness is expanded to the
Cosmic Level. Since Sahasrara is the gateway to the higher Transpersonal
Chakras, the awakened individual gains access to their powers as well over
time.
A full Kundalini awakening begins the Spiritual transformation process,
which is meant to align our consciousness with the two Fifth Dimensional
Chakras above the head, the Soul Star and the Stellar Gateway. When we

have access to these Chakras, we rise above physical pain, fear, and duality
in general. We begin to function fully on intuition and live in the present
moment, the Now. Once the mind is bypassed, the Ego is conquered, since it
exists within the mind only.
Through a Kundalini transformation, the pain of separation is overcome
since we experience the Oneness of all Creation by taking part in the Fifth
Dimension. All of our actions are based on love and truth, which builds
wisdom over time. We gain access to unlimited knowledge of Creation's
mysteries, received through Gnosis.
With the full activation of our Body of Light, we gain Immortality. We
realize that we will die physically, yes, since we cannot avoid this, but we
know internally that this life is one of many since our Souls can never be
annihilated.

The Merkaba-Vehicle of Light
The word "Merkaba" is derived from Ancient Egyptian. It refers to an
individual's vehicle of Light which allows for Interdimensional and
Interplanetary travel. "Mer" relates to two counterrotating fields of Light
spinning in the same space, while "Ka" refers to the individual Spirit and
"Ba" to the physical body. The two opposite Tetrahedrons within one another
represent the two poles, or aspects of Creation, Spirit and Matter, in
complete equilibrium.
The Merkaba has a prominent place in Jewish mysticism as well. In
Hebrew, the word "Merkabah" (Merkavah or Merkava) means "chariot," and
it refers to the Divine chariot of God described by the prophet Ezekiel in one
of his visions (The Old Testament). Ezekiel's visions are reminiscent of
visitations from other-dimensional or otherworldly Beings described through
metaphors that contain symbolic imagery.
In his vision, Ezekiel describes a Divine vehicle that had "wheels
within wheels," which sparkled like "diamonds in the sun" and rotated
around one another like a gyroscope. Jewish mystics and Spiritual people
interpret Ezekiel's vision as a reference to one's interdimensional vehicle of
Light—the Merkaba. It is a known fact in Spiritual circles that Ascended
Masters and Beings beyond our realms and dimensions manifest into our
reality via their Merkaba.
The Merkaba is a geometrical depiction of the optimized torus, one's
"dynamic doughnut," which includes the Auric field and the Electromagnetic

Field of the heart. As mentioned, the torus has a central axis with a north and
south pole that circulates energy in a spiral fashion. After a full Kundalini
awakening, energy begins to circulate within the torus at a higher velocity,
affecting the rate of spin of the Merkaba.
The Merkaba becomes fully activated as the torus becomes optimized,
enabling travel through consciousness. Metatron's Cube is a symbol that
contains every known sacred geometrical shape in the Universe. Attributed
to the Archangel Metatron, the representative of the Spirit Element,
Metatron's Cube serves as a metaphor for the manifested Universe and the
harmony and interconnectedness of all things. Among the myriad of
geometric shapes we can find in Metatron's Cube is the Merkaba, viewed
along the vertical plane from above or below (Figure 36).

Figure 36: Metatron’s Cube and the Merkaba
When viewed from the side, along the horizontal plane, the Merkaba's
two Tetrahedrons intersect along the middle and point in opposite directions
—one points up and the other points down. The upward-pointing

Tetrahedron in the Merkaba is the male Sun principle, related to the Fire and
Air Elements and electric energy. The downward-pointing Tetrahedron is the
female Earth principle corresponding with the Water and Earth Elements and
magnetic energy. Together, the two opposite, intertwined Tetrahedrons create
the "Star Tetrahedron," an eight-pointed object that is a Three-Dimensional
extension of the Hexagram, the Star of David.
The Sun Tetrahedron rotates clockwise while the Earth Tetrahedron
rotates counter-clockwise. In males, since the masculine energy is dominant,
the Sun Tetrahedron is oriented towards the body's front, while the Earth
Tetrahedron is oriented towards the back. In females, the orientation is
interchanged, and the Earth Tetrahedron faces the front (Figure 37).

Figure 37: Orientation of Tetrahedrons in Males and Females

The Sun Tetrahedron is powered by the Soul Star Chakra, six inches
above the head at its apex. Conversely, the inverted Earth Tetrahedron is
powered by the Earth Star Chakra—situated six inches below the feet. The
Earth Star Chakra is the apex of the inverted Earth Tetrahedron. Light energy
bounces back and forth between the Soul Star and Earth Star, along the Hara
Line, powering the two Tetrahedrons of the Merkaba and making them spin
in opposite directions.
When the Merkaba is optimized, the Light field generated around its
spinning spherical shape can stretch out 50-60 feet in diameter in proportion
to someone's height. If you were to look at a fast-spinning Merkaba with
appropriate instruments, you would see a saucer-like shape around the
person that expands out horizontally. It is not the Merkaba itself that is so
big, but the Light it emits that creates its outstretched form, diffusing along
the horizontal plane.

Figure 38: The Merkaba: Vehicle of Light (in Males)

The Chakric system's centre is in the Heart Chakra, Anahata; the two
counterrotating Tetrahedrons of the Merkaba are suspended at its level
(Figure 38). The Light emanating from the Heart Chakra causes the Merkaba
Tetrahedrons to spin. For this reason, there is a correlation between Merkaba
activation and one's Being resonating with the energy of unconditional love.
In other words, the more love you carry in your heart, your Merkaba spins
faster.
People who love unconditionally have enhanced creative abilities,
including psychic abilities such as transposing their Spirit into objects and
other people. Their fast-spinning Merkaba allows them to transcend the
barriers of their physical body through their imagination.

Figure 39: Kundalini Awakening and Merkaba Optimization

The Heart Chakra is the centre of our Being that receives Light energy
from the Soul Star and distributes it to the lower Chakras before grounding it
in the Earth Star. Our physical and etheric hearts interface with the world
around us as receivers of energies. As I will describe in the next section on
Kundalini and anatomy, the heart works in tandem with the brain to guide
our reality.
When the Kundalini is awakened, it travels upwards through the
Sushumna channel. In contrast, Ida and Pingala travel along the spine in a
spiral fashion, opposite one another, resembling the DNA molecule's Double
Helix. When the Kundalini reaches the top of the head at Sahasrara, it
expands this centre exponentially, allowing the Light energy from the Soul
Star to pour into our Chakric system below. As each of the Chakras become
infused with the Light, the toroidal energy field becomes optimized,
activating the latent potential of the Merkaba.
A full Kundalini awakening energizes the Body of Light, maximizing
Merkaba's capacity (Figure 39). When Light is infused into the Aura, the
counterrotating Tetrahedrons of the Merkaba begin to spin faster, forming a
Sphere of Light around the physical body. The Soul, which is also spherical,
now has a vehicle that supports its shape, with which it can leave the
physical body to travel within other dimensions of Space/Time. Seeing Light
orbs is a common Spiritual phenomenon of looking at the spinning
Merkabas of Beings beyond the Third Dimension who want to interface with
human beings through consciousness.
One of the main functions of the Merkaba is to allow the individual to
explore the deeper meanings and layers of life in the Universe. By
optimizing your Merkaba function, you become a Fifth Dimensional Being
of Light who can utilize the higher Transpersonal Chakras to your benefit.

The Return to the Garden Of Eden
The torus shape strikingly resembles an apple which is an interesting
correlation that brings us back to the Garden of Eden story from the Old
Testament and humanity's acquisition of knowledge. The mischievous
serpent is the one who went against God-the Creator by tempting Eve to do
the one thing she and Adam were told not to do—eat from the Tree of
Knowledge of Good and Evil.
The serpent said that if Adam and Eve disobey God, they will become
"as the Gods and know duality" (Genesis 3:4-5). Knowledge is received

through life experience in the World of Matter, built on the duality of Light
and Darkness, good and evil.
Adam and Eve eating the forbidden apple from the Tree of Knowledge
of Good and Evil can be seen as a reference to humanity obtaining a toroidal
energy field, which allows our consciousness to experience the World of
Matter. By materializing in the Third Dimension, our consciousness became
engrained in Matter, making us lose touch with the Spiritual Plane, our
inherent birthright.
The Garden of Eden is a metaphoric representation of the Spiritual
Plane, the source of our primordial innocence. As mentioned before,
everything that has a form in the World of Matter has a toroidal energy field
around it. The toroidal energy field supports the existence of Matter in the
Third Dimension of Space/Time.
The torus is comprised of the Major and Transpersonal Chakras that
form our Inner World and give us the cognitive functions to learn from
experience and grow in intellect. It also allows us to contemplate God's
Creation and the mysteries of the Universe through the inner Cosmic Planes
and dimensions corresponding with the Chakras.
After being expelled from the Garden of Eden for their act of
disobedience, God-the Creator said that Adam and Eve could make their
way back into the Garden only if they "eat the fruit from the Tree of Life,"
which would give them Eternal life. As explored in my previous book,
eating the fruit from the Tree of Life refers to awakening the Kundalini
energy and progressing upwards through the Chakras to achieve Spiritual
Enlightenment. Consequently, the serpent, a symbol for the Kundalini
energy, is also involved in the "coming home" process. He is found in the
cause but also the effect.
By awakening the entire Tree of Life within yourself through the
Serpent Power, the Kundalini, you integrate the Light within your Being. In
doing so, you optimize the rate of spin of your Merkaba's counterrotating
Tetrahedrons, which provide a vehicle for your Soul to travel in other
dimensions of Space/Time. More importantly, however, by unifying the
positive and negative energies within yourself, you regain entry into the
Garden of Eden and become Immortal and Eternal, like the Gods.

The Solar Flash Event

Many Ascension stories from Ancient traditions and religious scriptures
say that there will come a time when the Earth, along with all its inhabitants,
will transform into a Fifth-Dimensional Light Body. They say that our Planet
will have a physical shift that will transfigure its dense material body into a
Body of Light. Some people believe that the Earth will become a Star, but I
don't think this. Instead, I think that the Earth will retain its properties, which
will only be enhanced as the vibration of its consciousness heightens. And,
of course, with this shift in Earth consciousness, human consciousness will
be affected.
After many years of research and one powerful prophetic dream in
early 2019, I have concluded that an Ascension event will occur in our near
future. It will be an actual moment in time when something significant
happens on a Cosmic level. According to the Mayan tradition and prophecy,
it was supposed to happen in 2012. However, many Cosmic insiders who
claim contact with Extra-Terrestrials invested in our Spiritual Evolution
believe that humanity was not ready then, and the event was delayed. So if I
had to predict an actual year, I would say between 2022-2025, but it really
depends on how primed humanity will be.
The Sun will be the activating force behind this grand event, which will
usher humanity into the much-anticipated Golden Age. The Sun will
perform a type of activation from within, which will change the frequency of
its Light. In one moment, as the activation takes place, the Sun will give off
a flash, which may be catastrophic for the Earth's surface, as it will knock
out our electromagnetic grid and cause massive forest fires. Regardless of its
physical ramifications, this event will cause a significant shift in Earth's
consciousness, resulting in mass Kundalini awakenings for all of humanity.
Once our society stabilizes after this event, a new way of living will
begin for us all. Evil will be eradicated on a mass scale, as goodness will
prevail. From having gone through a Kundalini awakening myself, I can
safely say that once you experience it, you no longer have the choice but to
turn to the Light. And as you do, the darkness within you burns away
through the transformational fire of the Kundalini.
I believe that some people who have been so evil their whole lives, the
repeat murderers and rapists, for example, will be utterly consumed by this
fire and will not physically survive. The sudden shift in consciousness will
be too much for them to integrate, and as they try to cling to their evil ways,
the fire will devour their hearts. On the other hand, most people who have

only dabbled into darkness but have not allowed it to take complete control
over their Souls will become purified by the Holy Fire of the Kundalini.
Although my belief may sound Christian, understand that Jesus Christ
was a Kundalini awakened individual, a prototype of the experience others
were meant to emulate. Other central religious figures like Moses of Judaism
and the Buddha of Buddhism were also Kundalini awakened. However, due
to my Ancestry and upbringing, I aligned with Jesus Christ and his teachings
but studied both from an esoteric perspective, not a religious one. For this
reason, I mention Jesus' teachings often.
However, don't confuse my agenda and think I am promoting
Christianity or Catholicism. On the contrary, I believe that all central figures
of religions have an esoteric nature that reveals the essence of their actual
teachings before being polluted by dogmatic views of their respective
religions. These are the teachings I was always interested in since each one
contains some kernel of truth of our existence.
The prophecy of Jesus' Second Coming is a metaphor for a time in the
future when humanity will integrate his Christ Consciousness as their own
and become as he was, a Being of Light. Jesus' Second Coming falls in line
with the prophecies of the Ancients that speak of the collective human
Ascension. It does not mean that Jesus will reappear in physical form,
whether he even existed or not, which is a debate left for another time.
The word "Christ" is based on the Greek translation of "Messiah." As
such, Jesus of Nazareth was given the title of "Christ" to denote his
Godhood. Christ Consciousness represents a state of awareness of our true
nature, as Sons and Daughters of God-the Creator. In this state, the
integration of Spirit within Matter and equilibrium between the two is
implied, experienced through an influx of love energy via the expanded
Heart Chakra.
Christ Consciousness is akin to Cosmic Consciousness, the Fifth
Dimension, which is the ultimate destiny of the human race. And as
humanity learns to function at the Fifth Dimensional level, love, truth, and
wisdom will be our guiding force. We will not require governments and
other control structures but will be guided by the newly awakened Light
within us. Instead of countries fighting with one another, we will unify and
focus our energies on exploring space as we become true Intergalactic
beings.

PART IV:
KUNDALINI ANATOMY AND
PHYSIOLOGY

AWAKENING THE MIND’S EYE
The Mind's Eye or Third Eye is an energy portal or "doorway" within
the brain that provides perception beyond ordinary sight. It is an invisible
eye or window into the inner Cosmic Planes and higher states of
consciousness. The Mind's Eye is often associated with clairvoyance, the
ability to see visions, observe Auras, precognition, and even have Out-ofBody Experiences. Individuals that claim to have the capacity to utilize
their Mind's Eye are known as "seers." Awakening or activating your
Mind's Eye goes hand-in-hand with Spiritual Evolution and the path
towards Enlightenment.
As described in The Magus, The Mind's Eye is located in-between the
eyebrows, just above eye level at about 1/5 of the way towards the hairline.
It features a small, circular portal, whose location is one centimetre inside
the head when looking up at this point with closed eyes. A magnetic pull
occurs when we focus on it that puts us into a calm, meditative state. By
holding our attention on the Mind's Eye portal, the Ego becomes silent, and
we begin to receive visions and images streaming across this area as if on a
movie screen.
Although the Mind's Eye portal is located slightly above the centre of
the eyebrows, the actual location of Ajna Chakra is in the Third Ventricle of
the brain. Ajna is not a single Chakra but an arrangement of energy centres
in the brain and along the forehead. Ajna Chakra is often called the Mind's
Eye or Third Eye, although the latter terms insinuate the portal of Ajna,
whereas the actual Chakric location is in the centre of the brain.
Ajna is best described as the movie projector, while the movie screen
is the Mind's Eye. Therefore, the name "Third Eye" has an association with
the Third Ventricle of Ajna but also its location; between the two physical
eyes, in the brain's centre. Also, the Third Eye gives us the ability to
perceive our reality psychically, with our minds, thereby bypassing ordinary
physical sight; hence, it is called the Mind's Eye.
Although some Ancient traditions assert that Ajna Chakra is the
Thalamus, my research has led me to discover that the Thalamus,
Hypothalamus, and the Pineal and Pituitary Glands all contribute to the

workings of Ajna. These four primary endocrine and neurological
switchboards of the brain work in synchronicity with one another.
The Third Ventricle is filled with Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF), which
acts as the medium for carrying information from one part of the brain to
the next. The sacrum pumps the CSF up the spinal cord and into the brain.
The sacrum is also responsible for the awakening of the Kundalini, which
lies coiled in the coccyx. The bioelectrical Kundalini current charges up the
spine and into the brain through the CSF as the medium. I will describe the
role of the CSF and sacrum in more detail later on in this section.
The Hindu tradition speaks widely of the connection between the
Mind's Eye and Sahasrara, the Crown, otherwise called the ThousandPetalled Lotus. The former is the receiver for the energies experienced and
projected from the latter. Qabalistically speaking, Kether (the White Light)
can only be experienced when Chokmah (Force) projects its omnipotent
power into Binah (Form). Binah serves as the feminine receiver, the "Me"
component of the Self that receives its impetus from the masculine
projector, the "I." As Binah relates to intuition and understanding, Chokmah
is the All-Knowing force that projects into it to give us wisdom. The
workings of Chokmah and Binah constitute the operation of Ajna Chakra,
while Kether corresponds with Sahasrara. The three Supernal Sephiroth
work together and cannot be subtracted from one another.
In the Tantra Yoga system, the Mind's Eye is associated with the sound
"Om." The Om sound is the primordial sound of the Universe, which refers
to the Atman (Soul) and Brahman (Spirit) as One. However, when
pronounced correctly, it sounds more like "Aum," whose three letters
embody the Divine energy of Shakti and its three main characteristics of
creation, preservation, and liberation. After all, Ajna Chakra is feminine in
nature, which is why it relates to the Moon.
Taoism teaches that by practising Mind's Eye training exercises, one
can tune in to the correct vibration of the Universe and gain a solid
foundation on which to reach more advanced meditation levels. They teach
that the Mind's Eye portal expands up to the middle of the forehead when
the Fifth Eye centre opens. It is one of the primary energy centres of the
body, forming part of the principal meridian, which separates the left and
right hemispheres of the body and brain.
Ajna Chakra is the Lunar storehouse of Prana, while Manipura is the
Solar Prana depository. Ajna Chakra is female and nurturing, and its

primary mode of operation is to serve as a receptor of higher vibratory
energies projected from Sahasrara. Ajna, just as Vishuddhi, is sattvic,
meaning it contains the qualities of positivity, truth, goodness, serenity,
peacefulness, virtue, intelligence and balance. Sattvic qualities draw the
individual towards Dharma (meaning "Cosmic Law and Order" in
Buddhism) and Jnana (knowledge).
As Ajna has two petals, it indicates the number of major Nadis that
terminate at this Chakra. Ajna has the lowest number of Nadis but the most
important two, Ida and Pingala. Sushumna is excluded since it is the middle
energy channel that powers the Central Nervous System and sustains all the
Chakras.
Ida is the Lunar channel powering the right-brain hemisphere and the
Parasympathetic Nervous System (PNS). Pingala is the Solar channel that
powers the left-brain hemisphere and the Sympathetic Nervous System
(SNS). The PNS inhibits the body from overworking and restores it to a
calm and composed state—all qualities of the Water Element brought on by
the cooling Ida Nadi. The SNS readies the body for activity and prepares it
for a "fight or flight" response when a potential danger is recognized. The
SNS is characteristic of the Fire Element and heat, induced by the Pingala
Nadi.

THE SEVEN CHAKRAS AND THE
ENDOCRINE GLANDS
Each of the Major Chakras is paired with an endocrine gland(s), and
they govern their functions (Figure 40). In many cases, the individual
Chakras affect the organs surrounding those glands as well. The endocrine
system is part of the body’s primary control mechanism. It comprises several
ductless glands that produce hormones, which serve as the body’s chemical
messengers that act on different bodily operations and processes. These
include cognitive function and mood, development and growth, maintenance
of the body’s temperature, metabolism of food, sexual function, etc.
The endocrine system works to adjust hormone levels in the body.
Hormones get secreted directly into the bloodstream and are carried to
organs and tissues to stimulate or inhibit their processes. Hormonal balance
is a delicate process, and a slight lack or excess of hormones can lead to
disease states in the body. If one experiences any physical ailments, it means
that problems exist either with the endocrine glands, the Chakras that
governs them, or both. Never forget that all physical manifestations result
from energetic changes in the Inner Planes—As Above, So Below. This
Hermetic Principle or Law is Universal and is always in operation.
Muladhara/Adrenal Glands
The Root Chakra, Muladhara, governs the Adrenal Glands, which are
situated on top of the kidneys and aid in this Chakra’s function for selfpreservation. The Adrenals produce the hormones adrenaline and cortisol
that support our survival mechanism by stimulating the "fight or flight"
response when we are faced with a stressful situation. In addition, the
Adrenals also produce other hormones that help regulate our metabolism,
immune system, blood pressure, and other essential life functions.
Since the Root Chakra deals with grounding, it governs the support of
the physical body, including the back, hips, feet, spine, and legs. It also
regulates the rectum and the prostate gland (in men). An unbalanced
Muladhara Chakra can lead to issues such as sciatica, knee pain, arthritis,
constipation, and prostate issues for men.

Swadhisthana/Reproductive Glands
The Sacral Chakra, Swadhisthana, governs the Reproductive Glands,
including the testes in men and ovaries in women. The Reproductive Glands
regulate our sex drive and support our sexual development. The ovaries
produce eggs while the testes produce sperm, both of which are essential for
procreation. In addition, the ovaries produce the female hormones estrogen
and progesterone, which are responsible for aiding in the development of
breasts at puberty, regulating the menstrual cycle, and supporting a
pregnancy. The testes produce the male hormone testosterone, which is
responsible for helping men grow facial and body hair at puberty and for
stimulating the growth of the penis during sexual arousal.
Swathisthana Chakra also governs the other sexual organs, bowels,
bladder, prostate, lower intestine, and kidneys. As such, issues with these
organs and their performance are linked to an unbalanced or inactive Sacral
Chakra. Note that in many Spiritual systems, the correspondences are
reversed—Muladhara Chakra governs the Reproductive Glands, while
Swadhisthana Chakra governs the Adrenal Glands. Credible arguments can
be made for either case. The ovaries and Adrenal Glands are connected in
women. If a woman’s menstrual cycle is affected, it could be a sign of
Adrenal fatigue.
Manipura/Pancreas
The Solar Plexus Chakra, Manipura, governs the Pancreas, which
regulates the digestive system. Organs and body parts ruled by Manipura
include the liver, gall bladder, upper spine, upper back, upper intestines and
stomach. The Pancreas is located behind the stomach in the upper abdomen.
It produces enzymes that break down sugars, fats, and starches to aid
digestion. It also produces hormones that help regulate the level of glucose
(sugars) in the blood. Diabetes is a sign of a malfunctioning Pancreas
resulting from an unbalanced Manipura Chakra. When Manipura is overstimulated, excess blood glucose can occur, which causes diabetes. When
Manipura is under-stimulated, hypoglycemia (low blood glucose) can occur
as well as stomach ulcers. An unbalanced Manipura Chakra can also lead to
digestive and gallbladder issues.
Anahata/Thymus Gland
Anahata Chakra governs the Thymus Gland while regulating the
immune system. The Thymus Gland is located in the upper part of the chest

—behind the sternum and before the heart. The Thymus is crucial in keeping
our immune system working correctly. Its function is to produce white blood
cells (T-lymphocytes) that serve as the body’s defence system against
viruses, bacteria, and cancer cells. In addition, the white blood cells fight
infections and destroy abnormal cells.
Anahata Chakra also regulates the function of the heart, lungs, and
blood circulation. Also known as the "Heart" Chakra, Anahata is associated
with Spiritual and physical healing. It is considered the centre of our being
since it produces love energy that heals us on all levels, mind, body, and
Soul. Feelings of compassion and unconditional love are expressed through
the Heart Chakra. On the other hand, our Heart Chakra weakens when we
engage in negative emotions, such as anger, hate, jealousy, and sadness,
which affects the Thymus Gland, lowering the immune system’s diseasefighting ability. An unbalanced Heart Chakra can lead to high blood
pressure, poor blood circulation, respiratory and breathing difficulties, heart
problems, and a lowered immune system.

Figure 40: The Endocrine Glands in the Body

Vishuddhi/Thyroid Gland
The Throat Chakra, Vishuddhi, governs the Thyroid Gland, located at
the base of the neck. The Thyroid releases hormones that control
metabolism, the rate at which the body converts food into useable energy.
These hormones also regulate body temperature, breathing function, heart
rate, cholesterol levels, digestion processes, muscle tone, and menstrual
cycles in women. As such, the Thyroid Gland is one of the essential glands
in the body.
A dysfunction in the Thyroid Gland causes significant problems such as
debilitating fatigue, weak muscles, weight gain or loss, memory impairment,
and irregular menstrual cycles (in women). The Throat Chakra’s function
also controls the vocal cords, bronchial tubes, and all areas of the mouth,
including the tongue and oesophagus. An unbalanced Throat Chakra can
lead to sore throat or laryngitis, jaw pain, lung issues, pain or stiffness in the
neck, and vocal cord problems.
Ajna/Pineal Gland
The Mind's Eye Chakra, Ajna, governs the Pineal Gland, which
regulates the biological cycles. Besides releasing the hormone melatonin,
which is responsible for making us sleepy, the Pineal Gland also secretes
serotonin, the body's "happy" chemical.
The Pineal Gland's location is posterior (in the back) of the brain,
directly behind the Thalamus and slightly above eye level. The Pineal Gland
is the size of a grain of rice (5-8mm) in humans and is pinecone-shaped
(hence its name). It governs and inhibits the Pituitary Gland's function.
These two glands work in partnership with one another to achieve the overall
balance in the body. Creating a healthy balance between the Pineal and
Pituitary Glands helps facilitate the opening of Ajna Chakra—the Third Eye.
Ajna is our psychic centre since it gives us inner vision. Mental and
emotional disorders such as insomnia, bipolar, schizophrenia, personality
disorder, and depression result from an unbalanced Ajna Chakra and the
over or under-stimulation of the Pineal Gland. Ajna also controls the
function of the spinal cord, brainstem, pain centres, and nerves. Therefore,
an unbalanced Ajna Chakra can also be responsible for epileptic seizures and
other neurological disorders.
Sahasrara/Pituitary Gland

The Crown Chakra, Sahasrara, governs the Pituitary Gland and
produces hormones that control the rest of the endocrine system. As such,
The Pituitary is called the body’s "Master Gland." It is slightly bigger than a
pea and housed within a bony hollow, just behind the bridge of your nose. It
is anterior (in the front) of the brain and is attached to the Hypothalamus by
a thin stalk. The Pituitary connects to the Central Nervous System via the
Hypothalamus. Organs regulated by Sahasrara include the eyes and brain.
Issues such as headaches, vision and some neurological problems are
associated with an imbalanced Sahasrara Chakra. Note that in some Spiritual
systems, the Pineal Gland is associated with Sahasrara, while the Pituitary
Gland relates to Ajna. Since the Pineal Gland is at the back of the brain, it
relates to the subconscious, the Moon, and the Water Element (feminine),
which are associated with Ajna Chakra. The Pituitary is at the front of the
brain, which relates to the conscious Self, the Sun, and the Fire Element
(masculine). Therefore, I believe these are the correct correspondences of the
Pituitary and Pineal Glands. (More on the Pineal and Pituitary Glands and
their various functions in a later chapter.)

***
Since each of the Chakras is related to one of the Subtle Planes,
negative energy in those Planes will manifest as disturbances in the
corresponding glands and organs. All physical symptoms are manifestations
of the quality of the Chakric energies. Since Chakras are energy centres that
influence our Being on many levels, we need to keep them in balance if we
are to be healthy in mind, body, and Soul.
Physical afflictions may occur whenever one of our energy centres is
filled with negative energy or is blocked. Chakra tuning then is of crucial
importance for our physical well being. My first book, The Magus, focuses
on energy work through Ceremonial Magick, the Western method of healing
the Chakras. In Serpent Rising, I am focusing on Eastern techniques such as
Yoga, Tattvas, Mantras, while implementing New Age practices such as
Gemstones (Crystals), Aromatherapy, and Tuning Forks.
It is essential to understand that negative energy in one Chakra is felt at
the level of that specific Chakra and other Chakras connected with its
function. After all, our thoughts affect our emotions and vice versa. And
these, in turn, affect our willpower, imagination, level of inspiration, etc.

Chakra Healing and the Endocrine Glands

Endocrine glands are helpful reference points for Chakra healing since
they represent the connection between the energy of the Chakras and the
physical and physiological functions of the body. The nervous system and its
multiple nexuses are also associated with glands and organs. Therefore,
knowledge of the nervous system and its parts is crucial as it can aid healing
sessions. For this reason, I have included a chapter on it in this book.
Relaxing and balancing the nervous system allows for more effective healing
to a gland or specific region of the body.
There are various methods for optimizing the function of the Chakras.
One such method that an entire section in this work is devoted to is the
Eastern practice of Yoga. Yoga is comprised of postures (Asana), breathing
techniques (Pranayama), chanting (Mantra), meditation (Dhyana), as well as
the performance of specific physical gestures for energy manipulation
(Mudras). Some of these gestures involve the entire body, while others only
involve the hands. Besides balancing the energetic system, Yoga is an
excellent form of physical exercise that will leave you feeling and looking
great.
Diet is also an essential component in Yogic practice. After all, you are
what you eat. The physical body requires certain nutrients throughout the
day to function and perform at its most optimal level. By supporting good
health through diet and exercise, the Chakras become healed on a subtle
level. In turn, our thoughts, emotions, and overall Spiritual well-being are
positively affected. Also, by working on one Chakra, other Chakras are
impacted since the entire system is interdependent on its various
components.

SPIRITUAL
ANATOMY

AWAKENING

AND

BRAIN

The Pituitary Gland
The two glands that regulate the overall glandular and biological
function of the body are the Pituitary Gland and the Pineal Gland. These are
the two most essential glands in the human body. They orchestrate and
control the entire endocrine system.
Pituitary Gland's primary function is to regulate body chemistry. Just
like the Pineal Gland expresses its dual nature by controlling the day/night
cycles, the dual nature of the Pituitary Gland is expressed in the two lobes it
is comprised of (Figure 41). The Frontal Lobe (anterior) accounts for 80% of
the Pituitary Gland's weight and is the dominant lobe.
Various Ancient traditions assert that the anterior lobe is associated with
the intellectual mind, logic and reason. In contrast, the back/rear (posterior)
lobe relates to the emotional mind and imagination.
As mentioned, the Pituitary Gland controls the activity of most other
hormone-secreting glands, including the Thyroid, Adrenals, ovaries and
testicles. It secretes hormones from the anterior and posterior lobes, whose
purpose is to carry messages from one cell to another through our
bloodstream. Because of its immense role in our lives, it has been said that
removing the Pituitary Gland from the brain will cause physical death in
three days.
The Hypothalamus is situated immediately above the Pituitary Gland
and is connected to it. Directly in front of it is the Optic Chiasm which
transmits visual information from the Optic Nerves to the Occipital Lobe at
the back of the brain.
The Hypothalamus governs the Pituitary Gland by sending messages or
signals. These signals regulate the production and release of additional
hormones from the Pituitary, which, in turn, send messages to other glands
or organs in the body. The Hypothalamus is a type of communication centre
for the Pituitary Gland.
The Hypothalamus works with the Medulla Oblongata. The Medulla
and Hypothalamus control the involuntary, autonomic processes in the body,
such as regulating the heartbeat, breathing, and body temperature. In

addition, the Medulla is essential in the transmission of nerve impulses
between the spinal cord and higher brain centres. It is essentially the
doorway between the spinal cord and brain.

Figure 41: The Major Brain Centres

The Pineal Gland
The Pineal Gland is in the geometric centre, deep within the brain. It
produces the hormone serotonin and its derivative melatonin, essential to our
function and well-being. Serotonin is a chemical and neurotransmitter that
controls our moods, social behaviour, appetite and digestion, memory, and
sexual desire and function. Serotonin contributes to our level of happiness
and mental and emotional well-being—low serotonin levels have been
linked to depression, anxiety and other mental and emotional disorders. With
some of these issues, medical doctors usually prescribe anti-depression

medication (SSRI's), which are designed to boost serotonin levels in the
brain.
During the day, in response to sunlight received by the eyes, the Pineal
Gland secretes and stores a large amount of serotonin. When the night comes
and darkness sets in, the Pineal Gland begins to convert the stored serotonin
into the hormone melatonin, which gets released into the brain and blood,
inducing sleepiness throughout the night. Melatonin is the only hormone
synthesized by the Pineal Gland, and it affects our wake/sleep patterns and
the functions of the seasons. As such, it is often referred to as the "hormone
of darkness."
Around the Summer Solstice (the longest day of the year), people
experience the most sunlight and are happiest and most joyous since their
Pineal Gland secretes the most serotonin. Conversely, around the time of the
Winter Solstice (darkest day of the year), there is the least amount of
sunlight, meaning that the Pineal Gland receives the least amount of
serotonin, leading to the "winter blues," the time in the world when people
are most down and depressed.
The "Hypnagogic State," otherwise called the "Trance State" or "Alpha
State," is produced when consciousness finds itself at a point between being
awake and asleep. One is conscious and unconscious at the same time but
alert. Brain activity slows down, but not enough to put you to sleep. The
ultimate purpose of meditating is to reach this state since the Mind's Eye is
utilized during it, resulting in the ability to see visions and have mystical
experiences. The Alpha State also is known to induce Lucid Dreams if one
reaches it during a sleep cycle.
The Ancients readily used the Hypnagogic state to contact the Spirit
World and receive messages from the Divine. We can reach it with Spiritual
practices and methods but also through the use of certain drugs.
DMT (Dimethyltryptamine) is also produced from the Pineal Gland via
similar pathways as melatonin. Often called the "Spirit Molecule," DMT is
widespread throughout the plant kingdom, but there are also trace amounts
of it in mammals.
DMT-containing plants such as ayahuasca are commonly used in
Shamanic rituals. Its use can produce powerful, mystical, psychedelic, and
near-death experiences. DMT is hypothesized to be released at birth, death,
and vivid dreams. DMT is found in the blood, urine, faeces, lungs, and

kidneys in humans. Its highest traces, though, are found in the Cerebrospinal
Fluid.

The Pineal Gland and Spirituality
The word "Pineal" is derived from the Latin word "pinealis," referring
to a pinecone, the gland's shape. Ancient traditions widely depicted the
Pineal Gland in their art and sculpture. However, its meaning and role were
veiled from the profane through symbology, as was most esoteric knowledge
passed down through the ages. By examining the symbols of the Ancients
associated with the Pineal Gland (most notably the pinecone), we can get a
better idea of its Spiritual role in our lives.
Interest in the Pineal Gland can be traced to Ancient China during the
reign of the Yellow Emperor, Huangdi, the oldest of the five legendary
Chinese emperors. In the Ancient Hindu scriptures, The Vedas, the Pineal
Gland was one of seven Chakric points, purportedly connected to Sahasrara,
the Crown. This viewpoint evolved over time as other Yogis and Sages
began to relate the Pineal Gland to Ajna Chakra instead. As mentioned,
depending on the school of thought, Ajna and Sahasrara's correspondences
to the Pineal and Pituitary Glands are interchanged. So keep this in mind as
you read about brain anatomy and the Chakras.
Ancient Greek philosophers and scientists perhaps made the most
significant impact on our understanding of the Pineal Gland's Spiritual
function. Their discovery journey began with philosophical and theological
debates about the Seat of the Soul, in reference to the area of the body where
the Soul operates from. They referred to this concept as "Phren," the Ancient
Greek word for the location of thought or contemplation.
More than 2000 years ago, Plato and Aristotle wrote about the Soul and
agreed that the Soul operated from the heart but did not reside within the
body. They highlighted the three types of Soul, the nutritive, sensible, and
rational, and concluded that the heart was their control centre. Hippocrates
refuted this claim and believed that the Soul resided in the body and
operated from the brain, not the heart, since the brain is concerned with
logic, reason, and feelings.
Then came the Greek physician Herophilus, considered by many to be
the father of anatomy. He was the first scientist to discover the Pineal Gland
in the brain since he was the first to systematically perform scientific
dissections of human cadavers (corpses). He was also the first to describe the

brain ventricles and believed them to be the "Seat of the Mind."
Furthermore, he concluded that the Pineal Gland regulates the flow of
psychic "Pneuma," an Ancient Greek word for "breath," through these brain
ventricles.
Pneuma also refers to the Spirit and Soul from a theological and
religious perspective. It is an Ethereal substance in the form of air that flows
from the lungs and heart into the brain. Pneuma is necessary for the systemic
functioning of vital organs. In addition, it is the material that sustains the
body's consciousness—referred to as the "first instrument of the Soul."
Herophilus believed that the Pineal Gland regulated one's thoughts and
memories in the form of psychic Pneuma.
Galen, the Greek philosopher and doctor, refuted Herophilus and said
that the Pineal Gland is simply a gland that regulates blood flow and nothing
more. Instead, he advocated that the Cerebellum vermis controlled the
psychic Pneuma in the cerebral ventricles. Since Galen was the supreme
medical authority until the 17th century, his views and beliefs about the
Pineal Gland nature remained relatively unchallenged until Rene Descartes,
the French mathematician and philosopher, started examining these subjects.
Descartes concluded that the Pineal Gland was the medium between the
Soul and body and the source of all thought. He refuted Galen and said that
since the Pineal Gland was the only structure in the brain that wasn't
duplicated, it was the Soul's Seat. His position held that since the vermis of
the Cerebellum has two halves, it could not be a suitable candidate for this
task. Descartes believed that the Soul was beyond duality and had to have a
single counterpart symbolic of its function.
Descartes thought that the mind could be separate from the body but
can take over the animal instincts through the Pineal Gland. The Soul
controls the mind, which, in turn, governs the system of actions carried out
by the body by way of the Pineal Gland. Descartes believed that the Pineal
Gland was the Soul in physical form. Since the scientific community widely
respected Descartes, most did not dare challenge his views, and so the idea
that the Pineal Gland was the Seat of the Soul remained intact for the next
three centuries.
In recent years, scientists have determined that the Pineal Gland is an
endocrine organ intimately linked to the body's perception of Light.
However, its Spiritual function is still left to debate, although most scholars
still agree that it plays a significant role.

In The Magus, I have referred to the Seat of the Soul as being in
Manipura, the Solar Plexus Chakra, as the Soul's source energy. Manipura is
the source of our willpower—the Soul's highest expression. In addition, the
Soul needs Pranic energy for existence which it receives through food
digestion (related to Manipura) and respiration/oxygen intake (related to
Anahata). As such, the Soul is situated (seated) in our Sun centre, the
Tiphareth Sphere, located between Manipura and Anahata Chakras.
On the other hand, the Pineal Gland could very well be the Soul's
physical connection with the body. However, my research and intuitive
insight have led me to conclude that the dynamic between the Pineal and
Pituitary Glands and the Thalamus and Hypothalamus regulates
consciousness and Spirituality and not one gland or brain centre in particular.

The Thalamus
The Thalamus is in the brain's centre, sitting atop the brainstem,
between the Cerebral Cortex and the Midbrain, with vast nerve connections
to both of them that allow hub-like exchanges of information. The Thalamus
is our central control system, the command centre of consciousness
regulating sleep, alertness, and cognition. Its name is derived from Greek,
meaning "inner chamber."
The Thalamus acts as a relay station that filters information between the
brain and body. It receives vibrations (data) from the outside world via all
the sensory receptors (except olfactory) and transmits them to different parts
of the brain. The Thalamus affects voluntary movement by communicating
motor signals to the Cerebral Cortex. It also relays information concerning
arousal and physical pain.
Along with the Hypothalamus, the Amygdala and the Hippocampus,
the Thalamus is part of the Limbic System (Figure 42) that regulates
emotions and memory. The Limbic System governs the autonomic and
endocrine functions, which deal with responses to emotional stimuli, such as
"fight or flight." The Limbic System is often referred to as the "Reptilian
Brain," as it governs our behavioural responses and survival motivations.
Our sense of smell directly affects the Limbic System; odours are received
through the Olfactory Bulbs that register neural input detected by cells in the
nasal cavities.

Figure 42: The Limbic System
Interestingly, the Thalamus doesn't seem to distinguish between what is
outside and what is inside of us. It gives emotional meaning to everything
we take in through the senses, including our Spirituality and God-the Creator
concepts. In essence, the Thalamus is our interface with the reality around
us. It mediates to us our impression of what we accept as real.
The Thalamus has two lobes, known as the "Thalamic Bodies," which
look like a smaller version of the two brain hemispheres. They are also
comparable to two small eggs joined together. Applying the Hermetic
Principle of Correspondence (As Above, So Below), we find a reflection of
the Thalamic Bodies in a male's testicles and the female's ovaries, which are
also dual and egg-shaped. While the Thalamus contributes to creating our
mental reality (the Above), the testicles and ovaries are tasked with
generating our offspring on the Earth Plane (Below). As such, the egg shape
relates to creation on all levels of reality.
In 70-80% of human brains, the two Thalamic lobes are connected by a
flattened band of tissue called Massa Intermedia or Interthalamic Adhesion
(Figure 41). This tissue contains nerve cells and fibres. Around the Massa
Intermedia, the two Thalamic bodies are separated by the Third Ventricle,
which continually pumps Cerebrospinal Fluid into this area of the brain.
The Thalamus is the nucleus of our brain, the medium of
communication between the different parts of the neocortex. Researchers
and neurologists believe that the Thalamus is the centre of our
consciousness. According to scientific studies, if the Thalamus gets
damaged, it will knock out the consciousness, leading to a permanent coma.
Many Ancient traditions, including the Egyptians, regarded the
Thalamus as the Third Eye centre. As the Kundalini rises up the spinal
column (Sushumna), it reaches the Thalamus at the top of the brainstem.
According to Yoga and Tantra, the Ida and Pingala Nadis meet at the Third
Eye and unify. Their unification represents the complete opening of the
Third Eye. The Caduceus of Hermes represents this same concept, namely
the two snake heads facing one another in the upper part of the staff. The
Caduceus is humanity's Universal symbol representing Kundalini energy's
awakening process. However, most people don't know the deep esoteric
meaning behind this symbol and only link it to medicine.

In Yogic traditions, the brain's central area where the Thalamus lies
plays an essential role in Spiritual awakening. The massive nerve bundles
emerging from the spine and brainstem pass through the Thalamus before
being distributed through the Corpus Callosum. The Corpus Callosum
(Figure 41) is a large, C-shaped nerve fibre bundle beneath the Cerebral
Cortex that connects the left and right brain hemispheres. The nerve fibres
contained therein branch upwards throughout the neocortex until they reach
the top of the head. The millions of neurons along the head's crown correlate
with Sahasrara Chakra and its designation as the Thousand-Petalled Lotus.
Next to the Thalamus are the Pituitary and Pineal Glands and the
Hypothalamus, which play a central role in meditation practices and
Spiritual awakening. During meditation, the Light from Sahasrara is drawn
into the brain's centre, resulting in a substantial and permanent shift in one's
perception of Self and the world. The Thalamus is essentially our centre of
Spiritual transformation and the expansion of consciousness.
Since the Thalamus focuses our attention, it is involved in the filtering
process of the numerous impulses that stream into our brain at any given
moment. It acts like a valve that prioritises the vibratory messages our brain
receives from the outside world. For this reason, when a person undergoes a
Kundalini awakening, their Thalamus becomes optimised so that more
information can be received and processed at once.
The Thalamus' transfiguration results in one receiving and experiencing
a heightened version of reality through enhanced senses. As such, psychic
powers like clairvoyance, clairaudience, and clairsentience become a part of
everyday life. As the Thalamus becomes optimised, latent DNA is activated
within the Self, resulting in the permanent transformation of consciousness
at a cellular level.
The Thalamus is also the gateway between the conscious and
subconscious parts of the Self, a filter that keeps our Karmic energies at bay.
When a person undergoes a full Kundalini awakening and Light enters the
brain permanently, a bridge is formed between the conscious and
subconscious minds, allowing our negative, repressed energies to stream into
the consciousness. Instead of serving as a filter, the Thalamus no longer
operates as such. Instead, its function goes into hyperdrive, allowing our
consciousness to experience all the energies within us at once. Part of the
reason for this phenomenon is to open our consciousness fully so that we can

purify our Karmic energies through the Kundalini Fire and Spiritually
evolve.

The Reticular Formation
The Reticular Formation (Figure 43) is an intricate network of neurons
and nerve fibres that extends from the spinal cord to the lower brainstem,
through the Midbrain and Thalamus, splitting into multiple radiations to
different parts of the Cerebral Cortex. The Reticular Formation is a conduit
for transmitting information from the various sensory pathways and
transmitting them to parts of the brain via the Thalamus. Its other name is
the Reticular Activating System, or RAS for short.
The Reticular Formation is critical to the existence of consciousness
since it mediates all of our conscious activity. As the Thalamus is our central
control box, the Reticulating System is the wiring that connects that box to
the brainstem below and the Cerebral Cortex above. It is involved in many
states of consciousness that engage the Thalamus.
The Reticular Formation allows the Thalamus, Hypothalamus, and
Cerebral Cortex to control which sensory signals reach the Cerebrum
(uppermost part of the brain) and come to our conscious attention. As such,
it is the focusing mechanism of our minds.
The Reticular Formation is also involved in most Central Nervous
System activities. Pain sensations, for example, must pass through the
Reticular Formation before reaching the brain. In addition, the Autonomic
Nervous System, which deals with automatized behaviour such as breathing,
beating of the heart, and arousal, is also regulated by the Reticular
Formation.
Meditation alters our consciousness to allow higher brain regions to
control sensory impulses and environmental stimuli. During meditation, the
Hypothalamus and Reticular Formation become partially inhibited,
explaining some of the physiological effects of meditation, such as decreases
in blood pressure and respiration rate.
When we can suspend the Reticular Formation's function and stop the
flow of distracting and irrelevant sensory information, the brain begins
emitting Alpha waves, resulting in a calm and relaxed state of mind. As
such, overcoming the effects of the Reticular Formation is associated with
conscious awareness and mindfulness.

Figure 43: The Reticular Formation
The Reticular Formation directs our impressions of life and its
activities, which results in Self-identifying with those impressions. The Self
anchors to the physical body's sensations, whether good or bad and our
consciousness drops to the level of the Ego. Over time, the consciousness
becomes hijacked by the Ego. By aligning with it, we lose touch with the
Soul on the opposite end of the spectrum.

After a full Kundalini awakening, as the voltage of one's bioelectricity
increases, the Thalamus becomes optimized, and the Reticular Formation
becomes permanently disengaged. This experience results in feeling the
Body of Light's radiance through all the body cells at once instead of having
individual Spiritual moments or encounters. By bypassing the mind and Ego,
the individual begins to operate through the heart, which allows them to
experience the field of energy around them more substantially.
The skull sits atop the Atlas, the first cervical vertebra (C1). Atlas is
also the name of a Titan from Greek mythology who holds up the celestial
heavens or sky. Visual images of Atlas portray him as holding the Planet
Earth atop his shoulders. We see here a connection between the skull and
brain, the world, and the Heavens. The cervical Atlas holds up the head,
which contains the brain that regulates our reality concept. Our brain is also
the connecting link to the Heavens, or God-the Creator, popularly portrayed
by the artist Michelangelo in a fresco painting called "The Creation of
Adam," forming part of the Sistine Chapel's ceiling.
The first grouping of neurons in the Reticular Formation begins in the
area between the Medulla Oblongata and the top of the spinal cord,
represented by the Atlas. This area is the primary point of entry of Pranic
energy into the body for the Kundalini awakened individuals. The highest
concentration of the Life Force is stored in Sahasrara, our White Light
centre, the principal reservoir of Prana in those people whose consciousness
is expanded. Pranic energy flows downwards from Sahasrara into the
significant brain centres, thereby powering them. Afterwards, it moves down
the spine and into the nervous system, followed by the organs and muscles.
As such, the body becomes nourished by the Light energy. For this reason,
Spiritually awakened individuals don't require a lot of Pranic energy from
food and the Sun like the unawakened—they get everything they need from
Sahasrara Chakra.
Consequently, this same area where the Reticular Formation begins is
where a crucial and mysterious hidden Chakra is located, called Lalana or
Talu Chakra. The Kundalini must pierce Lalana Chakra on its upward rise
before entering the brain. Then, with Lalana Chakra's full activation, the
Kundalini can reach Ajna in the brain's centre, followed by Sahasrara at the
top of the head.
Lalana is the main switchboard that controls the entrance, storage and
distribution of Pranic energy. The Life Force must pass through Lalana

before reaching the five Chakras below it, passing on the Pranic power to the
major organs and endocrine glands through the Peripheral Nervous System
(PNS). Compared to Lalana, the lower Chakras are but minor distribution
centres of the Life Force. Lalana connects with Hara Chakra in the navel,
representing the location where the Self first anchored into the physical body
upon conception.
Lalana is esoterically called the "Mouth of God" or the "Golden
Chalice" as our Ascension Chakra—it relates to the "Three-Fold Flame of
the Soul" (Hebrew Letter Shin). Once Lalana is pierced, the Kundalini
continues to rise towards the brain's centre, where the three channels of Ida,
Pingala, and Sushumna unify into one energy source. Their unification
results in the energetic fusion of the Pineal and Pituitary Glands and the
Thalamus and Hypothalamus. The Reticular Formation's effect on the
consciousness detaches once the individual begins to operate from the
Source energy present in their brains' centre.
When Ajna and Sahasrara Chakras are fully open, the consciousness
expands to the Cosmic level, resulting in a permanent experience of the
Spiritual reality. After the Body of Light is fully activated, a brain rewiring
occurs over time, awakening its latent potential. The transformed individual
becomes a receiver of Cosmic Wisdom as their intelligence is expanded.
Once they align with these higher vibrations, the individual gradually
disassociates with the physical body, which lessens the Ego's hold over the
consciousness.
Once the Reticular Formation is disengaged, the Self can overcome the
Ego much easier since consciousness is naturally elevated to a higher level.
Physical pain is one of the critical factors that align the Self with the
physical body. After a full Kundalini awakening, one's conscious connection
with physical pain is severed permanently. As I have described this
phenomenon previously, one can still feel pain since it is impossible to fully
overcome it while living in the physical body. Instead, they develop the
ability to consciously disassociate from experiencing the pain's negative
energy by rising to a substantially higher Cosmic Plane than the Physical
Plane where the pain is occurring.

Parts of the Brain
The brain is divided into three main parts: the Cerebrum, Cerebellum,
and Brain Stem. I have already discussed the Brain Stem, which includes the

Midbrain, Pons, and Medulla Oblongata. The Midbrain is continuous with
the Diencephalon, our "interbrain," consisting of the Thalamus,
Hypothalamus, Pituitary Gland (posterior portion) and Pineal Gland. The
Diencephalon encloses the Third Ventricle.
The Cerebrum is the largest part of the brain and comprises the right
and left-brain hemispheres, joined together by the Corpus Callosum. The
right half of the brain controls the left side of the body, while the left half
controls the right side. Each hemisphere contains four lobes on its external
surface: Frontal, Parietal, Temporal and Occipital Lobes (Figure 44). The
brain's outer layer is called the Cerebral Cortex, which forms the brain's grey
matter, while the inner layer is the white matter.
Each of the four lobes is associated with a set of functions. For
example, the Frontal Lobe is in the front section of the brain. The Prefrontal
Cortex is the Cerebral Cortex that covers the front part of the Frontal Lobe.
The Frontal Lobe is concerned with higher cognitive functions such as
memory recall, emotional expression, mood changes, language and speech,
creativity, imagination, impulse control, social interaction and behaviours,
reasoning and problem solving, attention and concentration, organization
and planning, motivation, and sexual expression.
The Frontal Lobe is also responsible for primary motor function and
movement coordination. It is the most prominent lobe in the brain and is
most frequently used by the Self daily. Since it is at the front of the head,
directly behind the forehead, the Frontal Lobe is the most common traumatic
brain injury region with potentially the worst side effects because it affects
your cognitive abilities and motor function. In addition, damage to the
Frontal Lobes can set off a chain reaction that can negatively affect other
brain areas.

Figure 44: The Parts of the Brain
The Parietal Lobe is located near the brain's centre, behind the Frontal
Lobe. This brain area is the primary sensory area where impulses from the
skin related to temperature, pain, and touch are processed and interpreted.
The left Parietal Lobe is concerned with handling symbols, letters, and
numbers, and interpreting Archetypal information. The right Parietal Lobe is
tasked with interpreting spatial distance in images.
The Parietal Lobe is concerned with all spatial information, allowing us
to judge size, distance, and shapes. It provides us with an awareness of the
Self and other people in the space before us. Interestingly, neuroscientists
have determined that a person experiences increased activity in the Parietal
Cortex during a Spiritual experience. The boundary between the Self and
objects and people around us gets broken since most Spiritual experiences
involve some "out of body" element. As the individual experiences a sense
of unity with their environment, they transcend their physical surroundings.

The Temporal Lobe sits behind the ears and temples of the head. It
holds the Primary Auditory Cortex, which is concerned with processing
sound and encoding memory. It also plays an essential role in processing
emotions, language, and some aspects of visual perception. Temporal Lobe
consists of structures vital for conscious memory relating to facts and events.
It communicates with the Hippocampus and is modulated by the Amygdala.
The Occipital Lobe is located on the rear part of the upper brain. It
contains the Primary Visual Cortex, a brain region that receives input from
the eyes. The Occipital Lobe generally deals with interpreting distance,
colours, depth perception, object and face recognition, movements, and
memory information.
The Cerebellum is at the back of the head, and it controls the
coordination of muscular activity. It helps us maintain posture, balance, and
equilibrium by coordinating different muscle groups' timing and force to
produce fluid body movements. The Cerebellum also coordinates eye
movements, as well as speech.
The founder of psychoanalysis, Sigmund Freud, associated the
Cerebellum with the personal unconscious, the repressed part of the Self that
is hidden from the conscious mind. Although Freud coined the term
"unconscious" mind, he often interchanged it with the "subconscious" mind,
the former being a deeper layer of the latter. This aligns with Ancient
wisdom teachings that associate the subconscious mind with the back of the
head and the Moon. However, the scope of the subconscious mind involves
most parts of the brain, including the Limbic System. Excluded is the
Prefrontal Cortex, which represent the conscious mind and the Sun.
With a full Kundalini awakening, as the energy rises through the spinal
cord, large amounts of high-octane energy reach the brain. This energy flows
from the Reticular Formation to the Thalamus and into the Cerebral Cortex,
awakening dormant, inactive parts of the brain, especially in the Frontal
Lobe. Afterwards, the entire brain begins to pulse as a cohesive unit,
generating coherent, high amplitude brainwaves within all frequency bands.
This brain-power augmentation process is coupled with consciousness
expansion once the Kundalini pierces Sahasrara Chakra.
The Alpha band of frequency reaches maximum amplitude in the
Occipital Lobe, creating changes in perception of the world around us.
Things that used to appear one way get transformed before your very eyes

once the Occipital Lobe's potential is maximised, combined with the influx
of Astral Light in the head.
Increased brain activity unifies the conscious and subconscious minds,
represented Alchemically as the Sun and Moon energies conjoined in Holy
Matrimony. The Cerebellum is also affected by the heightened activity of the
brain as the individual gains access to repressed feelings, thoughts, desires,
and hidden memories to be integrated and transformed.
Large amounts of electrical activity occur in the Beta and Gamma
frequency bands in the Frontal Lobe, maximising the potential of the
Prefrontal Cortex and other essential parts. As a result, the Kundalini
awakened individual develops the ability to control their thoughts, emotions,
and behaviour, allowing them to master their reality. In addition, their
cognitive skills, including imagination, creativity, intelligence,
communication, critical thinking, and the power of concentration, are all
vastly enhanced, enabling them to become the powerful and efficient CoCreators with the Creator they are destined to be.

THE NERVOUS SYSTEM
The nervous system is made up of all the nerve cells one has in their
body. We use our nervous system to communicate with the outside world
and control the various mechanisms of our body. The nervous system
assimilates information through the senses and processes it, thereby eliciting
reactions in the body. It works in conjunction with the endocrine system to
respond to life’s events.
The nervous system connects the brain with every other organ, tissue
and body part. It contains billions of nerve cells called neurons. The brain
itself has 100 billion neurons that act like information messengers. These
neurons use chemical signals and electrical impulses to transmit information
between different parts of the brain as well as the brain and the rest of the
nervous system.
The nervous system consists of two parts with three distinct divisions.
Firstly and most importantly, we have the Central Nervous System (CNS),
which controls sensation and motor functions. The Central Nervous System
includes the brain, Twelve Pairs of Cranial Nerves, the spinal cord, and
thirty-one pairs of spinal nerves. All of the nerves of the Central Nervous
System are safely contained within the skull and the spinal canal.
Two types of nerves serve the brain: motor (efferent) nerves, which
execute responses to stimuli, and sensory (afferent) nerves, which transmit
sensory information and data from the body to the Central Nervous System.
Spinal nerves serve both functions; hence they are called "mixed" nerves.
Spinal nerves are connected to the spinal cord via ganglia which act like
relay stations for the Central Nervous System.
The head and brain serve as organs of the Soul and Higher Self. Since it
is at the top of the body, the head is nearest to the Heavens above. The brain
allows us to experience the world around us through the five senses of sight,
touch, taste, smell and sound. It also allows us to experience reality through
the sixth sense of psychism, received through the Mind’s Eye.
The Peripheral Nervous System (PNS) connects the nerves emanating
from the Central Nervous System to limbs and organs. All the nerves outside
the brain and spine are part of the Peripheral Nervous System (Figure 45).
The Peripheral Nervous System is further sub-divided into three separate

subsystems: Somatic Nervous System (SNS), Enteric Nervous System
(ENS), and Autonomic Nervous System (ANS).

Figure 45: The Central and Peripheral Nervous Systems
The Somatic Nervous System is the voluntary nervous system whose
sensory and motor nerves act as a medium of transmission of impulses
between the Central Nervous System and the muscular system. The Somatic
Nervous System controls everything about our physical body, which we can
consciously influence. The Enteric Nervous System acts involuntarily, and it
functions to control the gastrointestinal system. It is an autonomous nervous
system that regulates bowel motility in the digestion process.
The Autonomic Nervous System is also an involuntary system that acts
mostly unconsciously. It regulates our heart rate, breathing, metabolism,
digestion, sexual arousal, urination and pupil dilation/constriction. Both the
Autonomic Nervous System and Enteric Nervous System are always active,
whether we are awake or asleep. The involuntary nervous system reacts
quickly to changes in the body, allowing it to adapt by altering its regulatory
processes.
The Autonomic Nervous System is controlled by the Hypothalamus and
can be broken down into the Sympathetic Nervous System (SNS) and the
Parasympathetic Nervous System (PNS). The Sympathetic Nervous System
and Parasympathetic Nervous System usually do opposite things in the body.
The Sympathetic Nervous System is powered by the body’s masculine
(Yang) energy, while the Parasympathetic Nervous System is powered by the
feminine (Yin) energy.
The Sympathetic Nervous System prepares the body for mental and (or)
physical activity. It is activated in emergencies (fight or flight) to create
useable energy. It increases heart rate, dilates pupils, opens airways to
breathe more easily, increases blood supply to muscles, and inhibits
digestion and sexual arousal. The Parasympathetic Nervous System, on the
other hand, is passive. It is activated when the body and mind are in a
relaxed state. The Parasympathetic Nervous System lowers the heart rate,
constricts pupils, stimulates digestion and urination, triggers various
metabolic processes, and promotes sexual excitement.

Strong/Weak Nervous Systems
Stress and anxiety are common problems in today’s fast-paced society.
Therefore, people often talk about the importance of having a strong nervous

system when facing adversity in life. A person with a robust and resilient
nervous system faces reality head-on, the good and the bad. In contrast,
someone with a weak nervous system gets intimidated easily and shelters
themselves from reality to avoid negativity.
As a Co-Creator with the Creator, you cannot control what comes your
way 100% because there are always external factors that even the most acute
minds cannot think of, but you can choose through Free Will whether to
allow yourself to face everything that comes your way. That choice often
depends on how you handle fear energy, which either strengthens or
weakens your nervous system over time.
Think of the nervous system as a container. People with weak nervous
systems have small containers since there is a limit to how much anxiety,
stress, or physical pain they can withstand. People with strong nervous
systems have substantially larger containers and can deal with whatever
comes their way. They experience and process adverse events much faster
and aren’t shaken in their poise. People with robust nervous systems have
the attitude of facing fear and adversity, no matter how scary things may
appear on the surface. The result is becoming a master manifester of your
reality and maximizing your personal potential. People with strong nervous
systems live their dreams and get the most out of life.
The strength of your nervous system depends on how well you use your
willpower and how much you can overcome your emotions. Emotions are
fluid; they fluctuate from positive to negative at all times. Sometimes it takes
time for things to turn negative, but they inevitably do, and eventually, they
come back to being positive again.
The Principle of Rhythm (from The Kybalion) states that the pendulum
of rhythm manifests its swing between all opposites found in nature,
including emotions and thoughts. Therefore, nothing ever remains static, and
all things are constantly undergoing a process of change and transformation
from one state into another. As such, this Principle is always in play. You
cannot overcome it unless you learn to vibrate your willpower so strongly
that you rise above the Astral Plane of where the emotional swing is
occurring and into the Mental Plane.
Another key to a robust nervous system is learning to relax the body
and mind when dealing with a stressful situation. Stress and anxiety
immediately activate the Sympathetic Nervous System, which puts you into
survival mode—applying mindfulness and breathing techniques when under

pressure and not letting your emotions rule you will switch off the SNS and
turn on the Parasympathetic Nervous System. As such, even when dealing
with an adverse situation, you can be cool, calm, and collected, which will
enhance your problem-solving skills and yield the best outcome in any
situation.
Letting your emotions be the guiding force in your life will always
bring chaos and despair, while if you attune to your willpower and let it
guide you, you will triumph in life. Emotions are dual and void of logic and
reason. On the Tree of Life, they belong to the Netzach Sphere, while logic
and reason correspond with its opposite, Hod. Emotions are naturally
opposed to logic and reason until one learns to utilize their higher Sephiroth.
By implementing willpower (Geburah) and imagination (Tiphareth),
tempered by memory (Chesed), you can rise in consciousness and control
your reality much more efficiently than by being a slave to your emotions.
To rise even higher on the Tree of Life, you need to bypass duality
altogether, which means your consciousness needs to be attuned to intuition.
Intuition belongs to Ajna Chakra, which is powered by Binah
(Understanding) and Chokmah (Wisdom). To function fully through
intuition, you either need to have had a permanent Kundalini awakening or
have mastered meditation and gained the ability to resonate with the
Spiritual Plane at will. As mentioned, a Kundalini awakening will naturally
attune you to the Spiritual Plane over time. Thus, it is the desired experience
for all that know about Kundalini’s transformative power.

Yoga and the Nervous System
The Sympathetic and Parasympathetic Nervous Systems switch from
one to another many times throughout the day, especially in people whose
emotions dominate their life. Thus, for one to be balanced in mind, body,
and Soul, they need to have a balanced Autonomic Nervous System. When
one half of the Autonomic Nervous System is overly dominant, it causes
problems for the other half.
People who are prone to stress, for example, utilize the Sympathetic
Nervous System more so than is healthy for the mind and body, which
causes a detriment to the Parasympathetic Nervous System over time. As
such, the person is always tense and under mental pressure, unable to relax
and be at peace.

Psychological stress also affects the immune system, so the quality of
our Autonomic Nervous System makes the difference in how prone we are
to disease. Chronic degenerative diseases such as heart disease, high blood
pressure, ulcers, gastritis, insomnia, and Adrenal exhaustion result from an
unbalanced Autonomic Nervous System.
How we manage the two complementary halves of the Autonomic
Nervous System depends on diet and nutrition but also lifestyle and living
habits. We must learn to balance activity and rest, sleep and wakefulness,
and our thoughts and emotions.
Yoga helps regulate and strengthen the Autonomic Nervous System by
its effect on the Hypothalamus. Yoga is very efficient in helping the body
and mind relax through breathing exercises (Pranayama) and meditation.
Breathing is an interface between the Central Nervous System and
Autonomic Nervous System. Through the practice of Pranayama, one can
learn to control their autonomic functions. By controlling the lungs, we gain
control of the heart. Yogic postures (Asanas) aim to balance the masculine
and feminine energies within oneself, which promotes a healthy and robust
nervous system.
Anulom Vrilom (Alternate Nostril Breathing), for example, works
directly on the Sympathetic Nervous System or Parasympathetic Nervous
System, depending on which nostril you are breathing through. When you
breathe through the right nostril, metabolism increases, and the mind
becomes focused externally. When you breathe through the left nostril,
metabolism slows down, and the mind turns inwards, which enhances focus.

Kundalini Awakening and the Nervous System
A nerve impulse is an electrical phenomenon, just like a lightning
strike. So when there is an abundance of bioelectricity in the body after a full
Kundalini awakening, it puts the entire nervous system in overdrive. A
complete transformation occurs over time as the nervous system augments
itself, building new circuits daily to adjust to the inner changes.
Firstly, as the Kundalini Light activates and invigorates all the latent
nerves, the Central Nervous System begins operating at maximum capacity.
Higher activity levels are shown in the brain as it works extra hard to register
the vibration impulses coming in from the hyperactive Peripheral and
Autonomic Nervous Systems. Other than adjusting to the expanded
consciousness, the brain must also work to build new neural pathways to

accommodate this bioenergy expansion and synchronize with the rest of the
nervous system.
The initial stages of rebuilding your nervous system are taxing on the
mind and body. Since the entire process is new to the consciousness, the
body goes into "fight or flight" mode to protect against potential harm. As
such, the Sympathetic Nervous System dominates for the time being while
fear energy is present. As many Kundalini awakened people know firsthand,
Adrenal exhaustion from stress is common in these initial stages.
However, in the latter stages of the rebuilding process, once the new
neural pathways have been built up, the mind becomes more accepting of the
process, allowing it to relax. As a result, the Sympathetic Nervous System
switches off, and the Parasympathetic Nervous System takes over. The
Vagus Nerve also plays a role during this process, as it contributes to
bringing coherence to the body. Although it might take many years to
complete the transformation overall, the result will be a substantially
stronger nervous system that allows one to navigate potentially stressful
situations in an unprecedented way.

Vagus Nerve Function
The Twelve Cranial Nerves come in pairs and help link the brain with
other body areas such as the head, neck, and torso. The Vagus Nerve (Figure
46) is the longest of the Cranial Nerves (tenth nerve) as it runs from the
brainstem to a part of the colon. It has both motor and sensory functions.
The word "Vagus" means "wandering" in Latin, which is appropriate
since it is a winding, serpentine-like bundle of motor and sensory fibres that
primarily links the brainstem to the heart, lungs, and gut. The gut is the
digestive system (gastrointestinal tract) that consists of the mouth,
oesophagus, stomach, liver, small intestine, large intestine, and rectum
(anus).
The Vagus Nerve also branches out to interact with the liver, spleen,
gallbladder, ureter, uterus, neck, ears, tongue, and kidneys—its nerve fibres
innervate all the internal organs. Although the brain does communicate with
the body's organs via the Vagus Nerve, 80% of information is directed from
the organs to the brain. Out of all the organs in the body, the stomach uses
the Vagus Nerve to communicate with the brain the most—it sends signals to
it related to satiety (hunger), satiation (fullness), and energy metabolism.

The processing and management of emotions occur via the Vagus
Nerve between the heart, brain, and gut. The Enteric Nervous System has a
mesh-like system of neurons that govern the gut's function and communicate
with the brain via the Vagus Nerve. When you hear someone saying they
have a "gut feeling" about something, this sense of knowingness is a real
nervous signal in the gut. For this reason, we have a powerful gut reaction to
intense mental and emotional states. The Enteric Nervous System is often
referred to as our "second brain" centred in our Solar Plexus area, and the
Vagus Nerve is often called the "gut-brain axis."

Figure 46: The Vagus Nerve
The Vagus Nerve activates the Parasympathetic Nervous System, which
controls the body's unconscious "rest and digest" functions. The Vagus
Nerve serves to calm down the body after eating so that we can process food
easier. One of its key roles, though, is to act as the "reset" button that
counteracts our automatic, internal alarm system, the "fight or flight"
response of the Sympathetic Nervous System.
The neurotransmitter that the Vagus nerve uses to communicate with
the body, acetylcholine, is responsible for feelings of calm, peace, relaxation,
and learning and memory functions. People whose Vagus Nerve is
underactive are plagued by chronic anxiety and have poor learning abilities
and memory recall. It is crucial for these people to stimulate the Vagus
Nerve, either naturally or with an artificial electrical device. Doing so can
lead to positive health benefits, including overcoming stress and depression
and reducing inflammation caused by emotional pain.
Vagal tone is measured by tracking the heart rate alongside the
breathing rate. When we breathe in, our heart rate speeds up, while when we
breathe out, our heart rate slows down. People with high Vagal tones have a
more extended period between their inhalation and exhalation heart rates,
meaning that their body can relax faster after a stressful event.
High Vagal tone improves the function of many of the body's systems—
it reduces the risk of stroke by lowering blood pressure, aids in digestion and
blood sugar regulation, and enhances one's overall mood and resistance to
stress. Low Vagal tone, on the other hand, does the opposite to the body—it
is associated with cardiovascular conditions, diabetes, cognitive impairment,
chronic anxiety, and depression. Low Vagal tone also makes the body more
susceptible to autoimmune diseases resulting from high inflammatory states.
Vagus Nerve is known to promote love, compassion, trust, altruism and
gratitude, all of which add to our overall happiness in life. One of the most
effective, natural methods of stimulating the Vagus Nerve and improving the
Vagal tone is through the Pranayama technique of Diaphragmatic Breathing.
When you breathe slowly and rhythmically through your abdomen, the
diaphragm opens up, allowing more oxygen into the body. As a result, the
Parasympathetic Nervous System gets activated, calming the mind.
Diaphragmatic Breathing encompasses the whole of the nervous system
and the Seven Major Chakras, allowing us to ground our energies instead of

allowing them to run frantically in the chest area, causing unnecessary stress
and anxiety. (For a complete description of the Diaphragmatic Breathing
technique and its benefits, turn to "Pranayama Exercises" in the Yoga
section.)
Since the Vagus Nerve is connected to the vocal cords, singing,
humming, and chanting is also associated with improving one's Vagal tone.
Oral communication is beneficial, and people who talk a lot are generally of
a good disposition. Communicating with others promotes positive emotions
and brings social closeness, which improves Vagal tone.
Research has shown that Yoga increases Vagal tone, reduces stress, and
improves recovery from emotional and mental trauma. Pranayama and
meditation activate the Parasympathetic Nervous System and calm down the
mind, stimulating the Vagus Nerve. Asanas (Yogic postures) balance the
masculine and feminine parts of Self, creating harmony in the body and
promoting mindfulness. Other Yogic techniques also have tremendous
physical and Spiritual health benefits. For this reason, I have devoted an
entire section to the science, philosophy, and practice of Yoga.

The Vagus Nerve and the Kundalini
There are interesting similarities between the Vagus Nerve and the
Kundalini worth examining. After seeing the correspondences, it will be
self-evident that the Vagus Nerve complements the Kundalini awakening
process and may even be a physical representation of the Kundalini itself.
Firstly, the Vagus nerve runs from the colon area (Muladhara) to the
brain (Sahasrara). In contrast, the Kundalini lies coiled at the base of the
spine in Muladhara, right beside the anus. Once awakened, it rises upwards
to the brain's centre and finally the top of the head to complete the process.
People refer to the Vagus Nerve as one, but in reality, they are two
nerves that operate as one. Here we see a correlation with the Ida and
Pingala Nadis, the dual serpents that, when balanced, function as one
channel (Sushumna).
The Vagus Nerve interacts with all the organs and glands in the body
directly. Its role is to collect information from the organs and glands and
carry it to the brain for examination. Similarly, the Kundalini connects with
the body's organs and glands and communicates their state to the brain via
the nervous system.

The Kundalini moves through the spinal cord, while the Vagus Nerve
runs more centrally through the body. When we activate the Kundalini, all
the organs and glands begin to work in synchronicity with one another,
bringing coherence to the body. The Vagus Nerve also, when stimulated,
creates a unifying effect in the organs and glands where they begin to
function in harmony with one another.
Since the Vagus Nerve connects with the digestive system, impairment
in the Vagus Nerve will result in stomach problems. In contrast, the
Kundalini's power centre is in Manipura, and when it is not activated or its
energy is blocked, digestive and stomach problems will ensue.
The heart and brain are closely connected, and they communicate a
great deal via the Vagus Nerve. The Heart Chakra is also in direct
communication with the two highest Chakras in the brain, Ajna and
Sahasrara. In the Kundalini system, the Heart Chakra is the centre of the
Self, the part of us that assimilates and harmonizes energies from the other
Chakras. On a physical level, the heart is the most powerful generator of
electromagnetic energy in the body and our primary interface with our
environment (See chapter "Power of the Heart" for more detail on this
topic.)
The subject of Kundalini originated in the East and is part of Yogic and
Tantric practices. Both Yoga and Tantra involve Pranayama, Asanas,
meditation, and other techniques, which involve the Vagus Nerve response to
relax the body and calm the mind. Many Yogis recognize the Vagus Nerve's
role and power in the body and mind and consider it the anatomical
counterpart to the Sushumna Nadi. As such, the Vagus Nerve demands our
utmost attention.

The Twelve Pairs of Cranial Nerves
The Twelve Pairs of Cranial Nerves (Figure 47) connect your brain to
different parts of your head, neck, and trunk. As such, they relay information
between your brain and body parts, especially to and from the head and neck
regions. These Cranial Nerves govern sight, smell, hearing, eye movement,
feeling in the face, balance, and swallowing. The functions of the Twelve
Pairs of Cranial Nerves are sensory, motor, or both. Sensory nerves are
concerned with seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, and touching. On the other
hand, motor nerves help control movements in the head and neck regions.

Each of the Twelve Pairs of Cranial Nerves has corresponding Roman
numerals between I and XII based on their location from front to back. They
include the Olfactory Nerve (I), Optic Nerve (II), Oculomotor Nerve (III),
Trochlear Nerve (IV), Trigeminal Nerve (V), Abducens Nerve (VI), Facial
Nerve (VII), Vestibulocochlear Nerve (VIII), Glossopharyngeal Nerve (IX),
Vagus Nerve (X), Spinal Accessory Nerve (XI), and Hypoglossal Nerve
(XII). The Olfactory Nerve and Optic Nerve emerge from the Cerebrum
while the remaining ten pairs arise from the brainstem.

Figure 47: The Twelve Pairs of Cranial Nerves
The Olfactory Nerve transmits information to the brain regarding the
individual's sense of smell, while the Optic Nerve relays vision information.
The Oculomotor, Trochlear, and Abducens Nerves are concerned with eye
movements. The Trigeminal Nerve governs sensation and motor function in
the face and mouth. The Facial Nerve controls the muscles of facial

expression and conveys taste sensations from the tongue. The
Vestibulocochlear Nerve transmits sound and balance from the inner ear to
the brain. The Glossopharyngeal Nerve is concerned with the sense of taste
received from the part of the tongue and throat area. The Vagus Nerve has
many functions, which I have already described. The Spinal Accessory
Nerve controls muscles of the shoulder and neck. And finally, the
Hypoglossal Nerve controls tongue movements concerning speech and
swallowing of food.
The Twelve Pairs of Cranial Nerves correspond with the Twelve
Zodiacal Constellations. As such, they exemplify the Hermetic Principle of
"As Above, So Below." There are twelve "pairs" since we live in a world of
Duality where there are two of everything. The World of Duality, the
material world, reflects the Unity of the Spiritual World, which powers the
Twelve Zodiacal Constellations (groupings of Stars) by emitting its White
Light through them.
Keep in mind that the Sun of our Solar System is just one such Star, and
there are millions of Stars in the Milky Way alone, with Solar Systems of
their own. The Ancients named the ones that we see in our night sky
according to the shapes and images their groupings made, giving us the band
of Twelve Zodiac. Consequently, the Twelve Zodiacal Constellations are
reflected in the Twelve Pairs of Cranial Nerves, either a grand coincidence
or part of a larger mystery. This master plan has much to do with our
Spiritual Evolution and optimizing our personal power.
The Cranial Nerves inform the human mind (Below) of all that happens
in the manifested Universe they are a part of (Above). They are responsible
for how we interact with and interpret material reality. As our interface with
the outside world, the Twelve Pairs of Cranial Nerves help define our reality.
They allow us to receive external information and express our responses to
this information through body language, including facial expressions and eye
movements.
The Cranial Nerves affect how others perceive us by affecting our
bodily responses to outside stimuli. Since 93% of our communication is nonverbal, the Cranial Nerves are tasked with expressing our inner energies,
although most of this communication occurs on a subconscious level.
When a person undergoes a full Kundalini awakening and optimizes
their Chakras, they gain complete control over their vibrations and what
signals they put out into the Universe through their body language. As the

Silent Witness of one's Self awakens, it enables the awakened individual to
see themselves from the third-person. I believe this gift of the awakening is
connected to the expansion of the radius of one's Mind's Eye inner portal,
allowing the individual to leave their body at will and observe their body's
processes, including facial gestures and eye movements that reveal their
internal state. By gaining conscious control over the Twelve Pairs of Cranial
Nerves' otherwise involuntary functions, the individual's is well on their way
towards Self-mastery.

CEREBROSPINAL FLUID (CSF)
Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF for short) is a clear liquid substance that
bathes the spaces within and around the spinal cord as well as the brainstem
and brain. It plays a crucial role in sustaining consciousness, coordinating all
physical activity, and facilitating the Kundalini awakening process.
There are about 100-150 ml of CSF in the normal adult body (on
average), which is about two-thirds of a cup. The body itself produces
approximately 450-600ml of CSF per day. The CSF is continually produced,
and all of it is replaced every six to eight hours.
The cavities in the brain are fluid reservoirs called "ventricles," which
create the CSF. The brain ventricles serve as passageways or channels for
consciousness. When these passageways are obstructed or blocked, loss of
consciousness occurs. The most significant brain ventricle is the Third
Ventricle which encompasses the central area of the brain, containing the
Pineal and Pituitary Glands and the Thalamus and the Hypothalamus. The
CSF also bathes the outside of the brain, providing buoyancy and shockabsorption.
After serving the brain and brainstem, the CSF travels downwards
through the spinal cord's central canal as well as outside of it (Figure 48).
The central canal is a hollow space that is filled with CSF that goes all the
way down the spine. Even though the spinal cord ends between the first and
second lumbar vertebrae (L1-2), right above the waist area, the CSF goes
down through the sacrum. Once it reaches the bottom of the spine, the CSF
gets absorbed into the bloodstream.
The Central Nervous System is contained in the brain and spinal cord.
It is submerged in the CSF at all times. It serves as the medium through
which the brain communicates with the Central Nervous System. The actual
circuitry is the white and grey matter (butterfly shape) that make up the
spinal cord. Once the Central Nervous System integrates information from
the brain, it sends it out to different parts of the body.
The CSF is contained within the subarachnoid spaces in the brain and
spinal cord. The brain and spinal cord are protected by three membranes
(meninges): pia mater, arachnoid space, and dura mater. The subarachnoid

area is the connective tissue between pia mater and arachnoid space. It has a
spiderweb-like appearance and serves as the cushioning for the Central
Nervous System, the spinal cord, and the brain. Most importantly, it serves
as the channel for the CSF.

Figure 48: The Spinal Cord (Cross-Section)
The CSF can transmit Light, vibrations, movement, and molecules. It
transports nutrients and hormones to the entire nervous system and brain.
The CSF serves to protect both of them and the spinal cord. It also
eliminates all waste from these three parts of the body. On a more
fundamental level, the CSF regulates circadian rhythms and appetite.
The CSF is essential for keeping the physical body vibrant, healthy and
balanced. In addition, it facilitates the free-flowing movement of the spinal
column and head by providing mobility.

The CSF provides essential growth and survival factors to the brain,
from its embryonic stage to adulthood. It is critical for stem cell
multiplication, growth, migration, differentiation and our overall survival.

Brain Ventricles
The Third Ventricle (Figure 49) is a perfectly centreline structure that
contains the Pituitary Gland on the front end and the Pineal Gland on the
back end. In the middle of it are the Thalamus and Hypothalamus. It is the
connecting point between the rational upper parts of the brain and the
survival-based functions of the lower brain.
The Ancients have revered the space in-between the Third Ventricle
from time immemorial because of its Spiritual qualities. Daoists called it the
"Crystal Palace," while the Hindus referred to it as the "Cave of Brahma."
The Third Ventricle is essentially the foundation of the mind-body-Spirit
connection. Deep feelings of bliss, peace, and Oneness with the Source
originate in the Third Ventricle, which serves as our portal to Universal
knowledge.

Figure 49: CSF and the Brain Ventricles (Lateral/Side View)
The Third Ventricle brain cavern is the space that gives us a unified
awareness of our true essence. Many people believe that the CSF fluid in the
brain transmits the Spirit energy once the Pineal and Pituitary Glands and
Thalamus are activated. As such, the Third Ventricle allows for the
transformation of consciousness.
The Lateral Ventricle contains two horns (Figure 50) that make contact
with the Frontal Lobe, the Parietal Lobe, the Occipital Lobe, and the
Temporal Lobe. The posterior horn makes contact with the visual areas of
the brain.
The Fourth Ventricle makes contact with the Cerebellum, Pons, and
Medulla. It is situated between the Third Ventricle and the central canal

within the brainstem and spinal cord. The CSF produced and (or) flowing
into the Fourth Ventricle exists in the subarachnoid space at the bottom of
the skull, where the central canal enters the brainstem.
The CSF serves as a vehicle for transmitting information to the brain. It
absorbs, stores, and transmits vibrations from the outside world to different
brain receptors. For this reason, all the control areas of the brain, including
the spinal cord (Central Nervous System), are submerged in the CSF at all
times.

Figure 50: The Brain Ventricles (Front View)

CSF and Kundalini Awakening
The three Nadis of Ida, Pingala, and Sushumna meet at the Third
Ventricle, this CSF-filled radiant space in the middle of our heads. Once the

Kundalini and the activated Nadis enter the Third Ventricle area, the Pineal
and Pituitary Glands become electrified through the CSF as the medium. The
Kundalini awakening and Chakric activation happen on a subtle, Etheric
level, while the electrified CSF invigorates the nervous system and activates
latent potential in the major brain centres.
Since the Pineal and Pituitary Glands represent the feminine and
masculine components of the Self, the emotions and reason, their
simultaneous activation represents the unification of the right and left-brain
hemispheres. As such, the Thalamus begins to function at a higher level,
facilitating the opening and optimization of Ajna Chakra.
Sushumna operates through the CSF in the spinal cord. At the point
where the spinal cord ends between the first and second lumbar vertebrae
(L1-2), called Conus Medullaris, a delicate filament called Filum Terminale
begins and ends at the coccyx (Figure 51). It is approximately 20cm in
length and is without nervous tissue. One of the purposes of Filum
Terminale is to transport the CSF to the bottom of the spine.
Scientists believe that another tiny fibre runs through the central canal
in the spinal cord that is made of condensed CSF protein. This fibre serves
as a filament that lights up when electrically charged. Since one of the CSF
purposes is to carry Light energies, it serves as the conduit through which
the awakened Kundalini travels up the spine and into the brain.
Sushumna begins in the coccyx and runs up the Filum Terminale until it
reaches Conus Medullaris. It continues through the fibre in the central canal,
past the Fourth Ventricle, and ends in the Third Ventricle area, namely the
Thalamus and Hypothalamus that connects to it. The CSF gets electrically
charged by awakened Kundalini energy, which rises up the spinal cord,
systematically activating the Major Chakras until it reaches the higher brain
centres. The CSF is the key to the anatomical changes that occur in the brain
upon a Kundalini awakening. The nervous system transforms as well
through the invigoration of the spinal nerves. The organs are affected by this
infusion of Light energy, which explains why so many Kundalini awakened
individuals report anatomical changes in their insides.
When the Kundalini enters the brain through the Sushumna channel, it
terminates in the Thalamus, energizing it. Simultaneously, the Ida and
Pingala Nadis energize the Pineal and Pituitary Glands. Since Ida and
Pingala terminate in the Pineal and Pituitary Glands, their activation creates
a magnetic effect that projects a vibratory stream of energy towards the

Thalamus. The unification of these masculine (Yang) and feminine (Yin)
powers in the Thalamus enables a full opening of Ajna Chakra, followed by
Sahasrara at the top of the head.
Once the Kundalini reaches the Crown, the "I Am" component of the
Self, the Higher Self, awakens in our consciousness. The potential of the
Thalamus is maximized, making this brain centre a perfect antenna to
outside vibrations. The consciousness expands to the Cosmic level, and
instead of taking in only 10% of the stimuli from the environment, it can
now experience the full 100%.

Figure 51: Conus Medullaris and Filum Terminale

MULADHARA AND KUNDALINI
The Sacrum and Coccyx
The sacrum and coccyx (Figure 52) play a significant role in the
Kundalini awakening process. The sacrum, or sacral spine, contains five
fused vertebrae. It is a large triangular bone between the hip bones and the
last lumbar vertebra (L5). In Latin, the word "sacrum" means "sacred." The
Romans called this bone "os sacrum" while the Greeks termed it "hieron
osteon," the meaning of both being "Holy bone."
Interestingly, the word "hieron" in Greek also translates as "Temple."
The sacrum was considered sacred because within its bony concavity lay the
ovaries and uterus in females. The Ancients believed the female
reproductive organs to be Divine as the womb is the origin of Creation.

Figure 52: The Sacrum and Coccyx
The sacrum is our Holy Temple since it houses and protects the genital
organs, plexuses, and lower subtle energy centres, all of which are involved
in activating the Kundalini awakening process. The sacrum is also
responsible for pumping the CSF upwards into the brain. This fluid sustains

consciousness and plays a crucial role in activating the higher brain centres
upon Spiritual awakening.
In the Egyptian tradition, the sacrum was sacred to Osiris, the God of
the Underworld. The Egyptians believed that Osiris' backbone, referred to as
the Djed Pillar, represented the Kundalini energy whose awakening process
began in the sacrum. The coccyx (tailbone) is another small triangular bone
attached to the bottom of the sacrum.
As mentioned, in its state of potential, the Kundalini is coiled three and
a half times in the coccyx. Muladhara Chakra, the source Chakra of the
Kundalini energy, is located between the coccyx and perineum. When the
Kundalini energy is released, it travels through the hollow tube of the spinal
cord like a snake (Figure 53), accompanied by a hissing sound that a snake
makes when it is moving or about to strike.
Coincidentally, the coccyx is composed of three to five fused coccygeal
vertebrae or spinal bones. The coccyx is the remnant of a vestigial tail on a
physical level. In the context of human evolution, it is believed that all
humans had a tail at some point in time, as most mammals do today.
The word "coccyx" originates from the Greek "cuckoo" since the bone
itself is shaped like a cuckoo's beak. Interestingly, the cuckoo is a bird
renowned for its sound that brings forth change in one's life. Its call is
symbolic of a new fate or event that unfolds in one's life. Remember that the
Caduceus of Hermes, symbolic of the Kundalini awakening process,
originated in Greece—the Greeks were well aware of the coccyx' Spiritual
potential since they knew it housed the transformative Kundalini energy.
In the Egyptian tradition, the God of Wisdom, Thoth (Tehuti), has an
Ibis bird head with a long beak whose shape resembles the coccyx. Thoth is
the Egyptian counterpart to the Greek Hermes and Roman Mercury. These
three Gods have almost identical attributes and correspondences, and all
three are associated with the Kundalini energy and awakening process.
In The Koran (also spelt Quran), the Prophet Muhammad stated that the
coccyx never decays, and it is the bone from which humans will be
resurrected on the Day of Judgment. The Hebrews held the same idea, but
instead of the coccyx, they believed it was the sacrum that was indestructible
and was the nucleus of the human body's resurrection. They referred to the
sacrum as the "Luz" bone (Aramaic for "nut"). The sacrum has a pattern of
dimples, which, along with its overall shape, resembles the almond shell. In
The Zohar, the book of Jewish esoteric and mystical teachings, the Luz is the

bone in the spine that appears like a snake's head. Given that both the coccyx
and sacrum are triangular shaped, some Rabbis believe it is the sacrum that
is sacred, whereas others believe it to be the coccyx.

Figure 53: The Uncoiled Kundalini

Sacral Plexus and Sciatic Nerve
Another two essential factors in the Kundalini awakening process are
the Sacral Plexus and Sciatic Nerve (Figure 54). The Sacral Plexus is a nerve
plexus that emerges from the lower lumbar vertebrae and sacral vertebrae
(L4-S4). It provides motor and sensory nerves for the posterior thigh, the
pelvis, and most of the lower leg and foot.

Figure 54: The Sacral Plexus
Below the Sacral Plexus is Muladhara Chakra, located between the
coccyx and perineum. Muladhara's flower head projects downwards towards
the Earth and is situated near the Coccygeal Plexus. Muladhara's Chakric
stem, though, originates between the third and fourth sacral vertebrae (S3-4),
a part of the Sacral Plexus.
The Pelvic Plexus is located in the abdominal region, right in front of
the Sacral Plexus. The Pelvic Plexus innervates the organs associated with
Swadhisthana and Muladhara Chakras, namely our sexual organs.

There is a connection between the Earth and Water Elements and the
Planet Earth below our feet. It is not a coincidence that our lowest two Major
Chakras, Muladhara and Swadhisthana, relate to the only two passive
Elements concerned with receiving energy. As Muladhara is a receptacle of
the Earth energy generated by the Earth Star below the feet, Swadhisthana is
our emotional container, the Chakra of the subconscious mind and instincts.
Swadhisthana represents the emotions, including our sexual energy,
which fuels creativity. Sexual energy, when turned inwards, is proven to
have a transformative effect on consciousness. In my personal experience, I
was generating a tremendous amount of sexual energy through an
inadvertent Tantric sex practice I was performing, which led to continuous
internal orgasms that culminated in a full Kundalini awakening.

Figure 55: The Sciatic Nerves and Energy Channels in the Legs

The Sciatic Nerve is the largest peripheral nerve in the human body
formed by the union of five nerve roots from the Sacral Plexus. It is 2cm in
diameter and runs through the thigh and leg, down to the sole. The Sciatic
Nerve functions as a root for the nervous system by grounding us to Planet
Earth. Since there are two legs, two Sciatic Nerves are running through
them. The Sciatic Nerve splits into two major branches in the knee area
(tibial nerve and common peroneal nerve).
As the Vagus Nerve is a physical representation of the Kundalini
energy, the Sciatic Nerves are a biological equivalent of the legs' energy
channels that connect us to the Earth Star via the Foot Chakras (Figure 55).
Although the Ida and Pingala Nadis begin in Muladhara, their power source
comes from the two energy currents in the legs, the negative and the
positive.
Ida is attributed to the left side of the body, and it gets its negative
energy current from the left leg, while Pingala runs through the right side of
the body, getting its positive energy current from the right leg. The two legs
carry the feminine and masculine energies from the Earth Star into
Muladhara, thereby supplying the entire Chakric system with these dual
forces. As mentioned, the Earth Star operates as a battery for Muladhara—
the energy channels in the legs serve as the negative and positive currents
that transmit Earth energies from our Planet.

Bringing it All Together
To stimulate the Kundalini into activity and awaken it from its slumber,
we must create a powerful energy current in Muladhara, which involves
many factors working together. Stimulating the Ida and Pingala Nadis begins
in the Earth Star, the root of our overall energy system, represented by the
Hara Line. When the Earth Star becomes energized, through meditation or
other practices, it projects an energetic current through the energy channels
in the legs via the Heel Chakras. Simultaneously, the Sciatic Nerve is
stimulated, energizing the Sacral Plexus area where Muladhara's Chakric
stem begins.
As I will describe in more detail in the Yogic science section, we must
stimulate both Muladhara and Swadhisthana Chakras to awaken the
Kundalini. Swadhisthana Chakric stem begins between the first and second
lumbar vertebrae (L1-2), corresponding with where the spinal cord ends and
Filum Terminale begins. The Kundalini awakening process has much to do

with energizing the CSF, which starts in Filum Terminale and runs through
the spinal cord until it reaches the Third Ventricle and the central Thalamus
and Hypothalamus. By energizing the Third Ventricle, the surrounding brain
lobes also become stimulated. The entire process of brain-power expansion
involves the Third Ventricle and the electrified CSF.
Awakening the Kundalini in Muladhara involves the Five Prana Vayus,
the five movements or functions of Prana, the Life Force. When three of
these Prana Vayus change their directional force to meet in Hara Chakra, an
activation occurs that involves the generation of heat in the Navel centre.
This immense heat is accompanied by a feeling of ecstasy in the abdomen,
likened to intensified sexual excitement, which then electrifies the Sushumna
Nadi, making it light up like a light bulb. Once Sushumna lights up, the
Kundalini is awakened at the base of the spine. (I will explain this part of the
process in more detail in "The Five Prana Vayus" chapter).
In my experience, the awakened Kundalini manifested as a ball of Light
energy, emanating an electrical field about a golf ball's size. When it
awakened, it created pressure in the bottom of the spine, which was not
physical but could be felt regardless at a subtle level. The Kundalini ball of
Light travels upwards through the CSF in the spinal cord. Simultaneously,
the Earth Star generates tremendous energy, which gets transmitted towards
Muladhara Chakra via the legs' energy channels, thereby energizing the Ida
and Pingala Nadis.
On a physical level, the testes (men), ovaries (women) and the Adrenals
are involved in the Kundalini awakening process since they generate the
sexual energy needed to power Ida and Pingala and make them rise upwards.
Ida corresponds with the left testicle and ovary, while Pingala relates to the
right. Once the Kundalini begins to rise through Sushumna, Ida and Pingala,
powered by the sexual energy, rise in an undulating motion, adjacent to the
spinal cord, crossing each other at each of the Chakric points along the
spine.
As the Kundalini ball of Light energy systematically reaches each of
the Chakric stems, it combines with the balanced feminine and masculine
currents from Ida and Pingala, electrifying and sending a beam of Light
energy through each of the Chakric flower stems. Once each Chakric stem
gets infused with Light energy, the Chakric flower at the front of the body
begins to spin faster, fully awakening each Chakra and optimizing its flow.

After piercing Brahma and Vishnu Granthis and awakening the first
five Chakras, the Kundalini energy enters the brain's centre, terminating in
the Thalamus, which lights up from the inside. Conversely, the electrified
Ida and Pingala Nadis end in the Pineal and Pituitary Glands. Once fully
activated, the Pineal and Pituitary Glands become magnetized and project an
electrical current unifying in the central Thalamus as a single Light source.
As the Thalamus receives Ida and Pingala's energies, it Lights up more than
ever via the Pineal and Pituitary Glands, as the three main Nadis become
integrated.
The unification of the Sushumna, Ida, and Pingala Nadis in the
Thalamus sends a current of Light energy through the Chakric stem of Ajna
until it reaches its flower head which lies in the centre of the eyebrows
(slightly above). If the stream of Light energy being projected from the
Thalamus is powerful enough, it will expand Ajna's Mind's Eye portal. I
likened this part of the process to the circular portal of Ajna growing from a
doughnut size to a car tire. As I mentioned, though, this part of the process
was not Universal, which means that it only happens to those individuals
who generate an exceptional amount of Light energy in the centre of their
brains, as it happened with me.
The next phase of the Kundalini awakening process involves the unified
Light current of Ida, Pingala, and Sushumna Nadis rising through the
cerebral cortex to the top, centre of the head. Along the way, Rudra Granthi
is pierced, which is necessary for the awakening of Sahasrara since this is
the final knot that binds consciousness to duality. (More on the Granthis and
their role in the Kundalini awakening process in "The Three Granthis"
chapter).
If the Kundalini current is powerful enough once it reaches the top of
the head, the Cosmic Egg blows open, resulting in the "electrocution"
phenomenon, which involves the infusion of Light energy into the SeventyTwo Thousand Nadis. This experience represents the full activation of the
Body of Light. The next and final step of the Kundalini awakening process is
fully opening the Thousand-Petalled Lotus of Sahasrara, optimizing one's
toroidal energy field and unifying their consciousness with Cosmic
Consciousness. (Figure 56 is a symbolic representation of the Kundalini
awakening process and its association with the Caduceus of Hermes and
DNA's Double Helix.)

Figure 56: Kundalini/Caduceus of Hermes/DNA's Double Helix

THE POWER OF THE HEART
The HeartMath Institute has been conducting research for the past two
decades on the power of the human heart. They have determined that the
heart is the most powerful electromagnetic energy generator in the human
body. Its electrical field is about 60 times greater in amplitude than that of
the brain. The heart’s magnetic field, on the other hand, is 5000 times greater
in strength than the field generated by the brain.
The heart’s Electromagnetic Field (EMF) is toroidal in shape (Figure
57), and it envelops every cell of the human body. Our heart EMF extends
out in all directions and directly affects other people’s brainwaves that are
within eight to ten feet (on average) of where we are. People further away
(up to 15 feet) are also affected but in more subtle ways. The heart EMF, just
like the Auric field, fluctuates in size along the horizontal plane, expanding
and contracting like a living, breathing organism.
Since HearthMath’s discoveries about the power of the heart are
relatively new, many researchers have suggested that the heart EMF and the
Auric field are the same thing since both are toroidal in shape, and both are
expressive of our electromagnetic energies. My belief, formed through
extensive research and Divine guidance, is that they are two-separate but
interconnected electromagnetic fields.
The Auric field is a composite of the different subtle energies that
express the Major and Transpersonal Chakras, which vibrate at various
electromagnetic frequencies. The Auric field also contains other subtle fields
that connect us to other living beings, the Planet Earth and the Universe.
Since the Auric field extends to approximately five to six feet and the heart
EMF is substantially larger, we are clearly talking about two different things.
I believe that the Auric field sits inside the heart EMF, and they are two
parts to a whole. The heart EMF’s purpose is to register vibrations from the
environment and send them to the brain and the rest of the body. As a result,
the inner Cosmic Planes are affected, influencing the Chakric energies. The
Chakras, in turn, elicit certain responses in the consciousness based on their
corresponding inner faculties. For this reason, the heart EMF affects us on
all levels, Spiritual, mental, emotional, and physical. It acts as our interface
with the environment, sending information into the Auric field, which
powers the consciousness.

Figure 57: The Electromagnetic Field of the Heart
The heart EMF is related to the Heart Chakra, which corresponds with
the Air Element and the Lower Mental Plane. Due to its placement, the heart
EMF acts as the intermediary between the higher and lower Cosmic Planes.
Subtle vibrations from the environment are picked up and transmitted into
the Higher Mental and Spiritual Planes above and Astral and Physical Planes
below.
The Heart Chakra is the fourth Major Chakra positioned between the
higher three Chakras of the Spirit Element and the lower three Chakras (Fire,
Water, and Earth). The Air Element is esoterically known as an intermediary
between Spirit and Matter, compared to how the air-containing atmosphere
separates the Heavens above and Earth below. Air relates to breath and
oxygen, sustaining all of life. We cannot survive for more than a few minutes

without the act of breathing, as it is essential to our survival. In this way, the
heart EMF serves the Soul and mind, the go-betweens of Spirit and Matter.

Heart-Brain Connection
In fetal development, the heart is the first organ that forms—it begins to
beat before the brain even develops. The heart is the central part of the Self,
the foundation upon which the rest of the body is created in the womb.
Neurocardiologists have determined that the heart contains many similar
components to the brain, allowing for a dynamic, ongoing, two-way
dialogue.
Approximately 60-65% of heart cells are neural cells, much like those
in the brain. These 40 000 neurons are clustered in groups in the same way
as neural groupings of the brain and contain the same ganglia,
neurotransmitters, proteins, and support cells. The "heart-brain," as it is
commonly called, enables the heart to act independently from the cranial
brain. As it processes life events emotionally, the heart develops decisionmaking abilities and memory. Over time, the heart develops its own
emotional intelligence that helps guide us in life.
The heart and brain communicate neurologically (through the nervous
system) and energetically (through their EMFs). They also communicate
hormonally and through pulse waves (biophysically). Vibratory energies that
continuously flow between the heart and brain assist with processing events
and emotional responses, sensory experience, reasoning, and memory.
The heart is our primary interface with the world around us that works
in unison with the Thalamus and brain. The brain and heart relate to the
Mind and Soul, which are partners in maintaining and governing
consciousness. As the brain contains the ventricles which channel Spirit
energy and consciousness, the heart also has subtle passageways that
accomplish the same. If there is a disruption in the harmonious flow of
communication of Spirit and consciousness between the brain and heart, it
can result in the loss of consciousness.
Our heart EMF continuously receives signals from the environment, but
most of that information never reaches the conscious mind. Instead, the data
gets stored in the subconscious. The subconscious mind is associated with
90% of the brain's neural activity and substantially impacts our behaviour
more than the conscious mind. For this reason, most of our instinctual

responses, such as expressions of body language, are automatic without us
being consciously aware of having initiated them.
The conscious mind uses the Prefrontal Cortex of the brain to process
information. It can process and manage only 40 nerve impulses per second.
In comparison, the subconscious mind operating from the backside of the
brain can process 40 million nerve impulses per second—the subconscious
mind's processor is 1 million times more powerful than the conscious mind's.
After a full Kundalini awakening, when the inner Light enters the
brain's centre and localizes there permanently, the conscious and
subconscious minds become one, resulting in a permanent upgrade of one's
CPU. As such, the individual gains full access to all the information read by
their heart EMF, which increases their awareness, optimizing their decisionmaking abilities.

Body Coherence
The human heart is a hollow muscle, the size of a fist, that beats at 72
beats a minute and is the circulatory system's centre (Figure 58). The heart is
located in the head and torso's centre, in the centre of the chest (slightly
offset to the left), allowing for the most optimal connection to every organ
that powers the body.

Figure 58: The Human Heart and the Circulatory System
The circulatory system is made up of blood vessels (arteries) that carry
blood away from and towards the heart. The heart's right side receives
oxygen-poor blood from the veins and pumps it to the lungs, where it picks
up oxygen and discards carbon dioxide. The heart's left side gets the oxygenrich blood and pumps it through the arteries to the rest of the body, including
the brain. Of all the organs, the brain is one of the most significant
consumers of oxygen-rich blood, and insufficient cranial supply can cause
significant brain fatigue.
The heart has a significant influence on the physical body on a cellular
level. Not only does the heart pump oxygen and nutrients to every cell in the
body through the circulatory system, but it also produces hormones that
impact the physiological function of the body and brain. As mentioned, one
of the ways the heart and brain communicate is hormonally, and this is
because the heart serves as an endocrine gland.

Through electromagnetic frequencies and chemical releases, our heart
entrains the brain's rhythms, along with the various systems in the body
(respiratory, immune, digestive, circulatory, endocrine, etc.). Body
coherence is achieved when harmonious and balanced interaction is created
in all of the body's systems.
If we experience positive, loving emotions, body coherence occurs,
slowing the brainwaves and balancing the Parasympathetic and Sympathetic
Nervous Systems. Our heartbeat slows down and becomes smooth and
balanced. Our minds become clear, allowing us to tune into the inner Light
of our Souls. As such, our creativity, imagination, intuition, and inspiration
become heightened, enabling us to tap into our innermost potential as
Spiritual human beings.
Conversely, if we experience negative, fearful emotions, our body falls
out of harmony and stress and anxiety set in. Our brainwaves speed up,
making us more alert. The heartbeat also speeds up, and we often experience
rhythmic contractions resulting from our minds processing negativity. Our
Sympathetic Nervous System overrides the Parasympathetic one, and we
lose touch with our Souls, which severs our connection to inspiration and
creativity. Our ability to think becomes clouded by the negative state we are
in, and we rely on our Egos to rationalise our existence.
Breathing through your stomach by expanding the diaphragm
(Diaphragmatic Breathing) is perhaps the most useful way to neutralise
negative energy and calm down the interior. This Yogic breathing technique
(Pranayama) allows one to regain control over their bodily rhythms and
achieve body coherence again. Diaphragmatic Breathing is a pre-requisite
for meditation, which is another method for raising the vibration of
consciousness that optimises the body's health.

The Heart and Vibrations
According to the Hermetic Principle of Vibration, all things in the
Universe (including living organisms, thoughts, emotions, etc.) are in a state
of vibratory motion on a sub-atomic level. Quantum physics now also
affirms what the Ancients have been saying for thousands of years. Not only
is Matter made up of vibratory energies, but vibration is the basis of all
communication in the Universe, whether orally or through more subtle levels
—we are all continually inducing one another through our vibes.

The Earth’s magnetic resonances vibrate at the same frequency as our
heart rhythms and brainwaves—As Above, So Below. All living organisms
broadcast unique vibratory energies while the heart is the receiver that
"reads" the energy fields around us. Our heart EMFs constantly receive
vibratory signals from the environment, which allows our cells to interact
with the outside world. Scientific analysis reveals that the heart, not the
brain, initiates the first response to incoming information from the outside.
For this reason, you hear people often say, "I like this person’s vibes,"
relating to their impression of them received through the heart.
Interestingly, with the plethora of stimuli present at any given time, the
heart primarily registers information that resonates with one's inner vibes.
This phenomenon is a manifestation of the Law of Attraction which states
that positive or negative thoughts and emotions bring positive or negative
experiences in a person's life. In other words, we experience that which our
minds and hearts focus on.
For example, a person who occupies their minds and hearts with
thoughts and feelings of love will attune to information from the
environment that pertains to love energy. Their heart EMF will focus on and
amplify all signals from the environment related to love. Someone who only
thinks of fear and experiences fearful emotions will access environmental
data relating to fear. And even if we are thinking about not thinking
something, we focus on that thing regardless, which manifests in our minds
and hearts. Thus, we continuously register and hear what we are
programmed to hear.
Each person's heart has an electromagnetic wave pattern as unique as
their fingerprint. It not only contains data about the body's current state but
also has encoded memories stored within the heart's two distinct networks of
nerves. You can find proof of the heart-memory phenomenon in heart
transplant recipients. It is common for someone who received another
person's heart to develop changes in their personality, likes, dislikes, and
preferences, brought on by old memories stored in the heart.

The Heart and Relationships
Upon meeting someone, we undergo a heart-brain synchronization with
that person. Our mental and emotional state immediately induces the other
person since they psychically read our intentions on an energetic level. For
example, when we come from a place of love, truth, and respect, then

another person's heart will naturally open to us, and they will reciprocate our
good intentions. If we come from a place of Ego, and our intentions aren't
pure, such as when we are trying to manipulate someone for selfish gains,
then the other person will naturally go on the defence. Their hearts will
remain closed to us, and instead, their brains will take over to try and
rationalize the situation.
If we are under stress and agitated, we naturally repel other people
around us while we attract them when we are calm and at peace. People are
drawn to positivity because we intuitively know that we are continually
communicating telepathically and are inducing each other with our thoughts
and emotions. This knowledge is something we are born with, even though
we might not recognize it with our Egos.
Considering the heart's electromagnetic power and the impact that
loving, positive energy has on people we encounter, it is no wonder why we
naturally crave being social and forming bonds with others. We nourish and
heal each other when our hearts are open and when our intentions are good.
With good intentions alone, we can penetrate through the Ego barrier and the
personality and reach the Soul of another human being. Conversely, when
our intentions are selfish, we trigger one another emotionally and can cause
harm at a deep level. In the latter case, the Ego takes over, and there is no
exchange of Soul-healing energies.
When you are in a quarrel with someone, the best way to resolve your
differences is to speak from the heart to that person, who will most often
reciprocate this action. Truth has a way of clearing all obstacles as it
neutralizes all negative energy so one can get to the "heart of the matter," as
the saying goes. When there is an openness in the heart between two people,
not only do differences become resolved, but the loving bond between them
becomes stronger. For this reason, living from the heart and being honest at
all times allows one never to have regrets and live with a clear conscience.
Isolating oneself from others and lacking human contact on a physical
and emotional level is painful and often numbing if too much time passes.
We need human connections, including friendships and intimacy, to help us
on our Spiritual Evolution path. Romantic relationships are the most healing,
especially if they involve sex since sex is the physical act of unification that
creates the most powerful bond when an open heart and loving intentions are
applied.

Human Behaviour and Cause and Effect
As I have described in The Magus, if you want to develop true personal
power, you have to be familiar with your Demons so you can use their
energies productively when the situation requires it. For example, when
someone is trying to manipulate you, you will recognize their intention
instead of being blind to it and can exact an equal and opposite reaction to
neutralize the Law of Karma.
When I speak of Demons, I refer to the negative, fear energy that is not
of the Light per se but can further the Light's agenda. Although what I am
saying may sound counter-intuitive (since many of you were taught that
Demonic energies are bad), it is not. Negative energy is not something you
should run from but should seek to tame within you. Through the application
of Free Will, you can readily use negative energy to obtain a positive
outcome. Doing so gives your Demons wings, metaphorically speaking.
Being familiar with your Demonic energies allows you to realize when
you are energetically attacked by others, weigh the type of attack, and
mobilize your inner forces to get on the offence. Remember, we must punish
all evil; otherwise, we become evil's accomplices. The Law of Karma
requires us to be vigilant and strong when faced with any adversarial energy
and exact Severity when it is required of us. In doing so, we subtly teach
others to behave correctly, per the Universal Laws. We each have a sacred
duty we owe to our Creator to treat each other with love and respect and
protect one another from all evil.
If we run away from negative energies, we fail to build our personal
power, which takes away our God-given abilities over time. Every time we
don't punish evil out of fear of confrontation, that fear gets magnified within
us, severing us more and more from the Light in our Souls. And since the
Law of Karma is cyclic, we continue to face the same challenges, time and
again, until we get it right.
The "Eye for an Eye" Law of Moses from The Torah (The Old
Testament) contains the underlying principle that punishment must fit the
crime. It is in line with Newton's Third Law of Cause and Effect, based on
the much earlier Hermetic Cause and Effect Law, "For every action (Force)
in nature, there is an equal and opposite reaction." Cause and Effect is the
foundation of the Law of Karma, and it essentially implies that what you put
out into the Universe, you will get back.

"You reap what you sow," as the saying goes—if you do bad things, bad
things will happen to you, while if you do good things, then good things will
happen to you. From a human relations perspective, if you are positive and
loving to other people, you will get that back from them, while if you are
selfish and evil, others will return the favour. We are all inherently tasked
with expressing the Law of Cause and Effect and being the effect of other
people's causes.
A similar maxim with the same underlying energy came from Jesus,
who said, "You live by the sword, you die by the sword," meaning that the
quality of your life and choices you make will determine your life course.
On an even deeper level, Jesus’ saying implies that you attract the kind of
life that corresponds with the quality of your heart. If you exhibit courage,
strength, and fortitude, you can live up to your potential as a Spiritual human
being. Whereas, if you live in fear, you will never be satisfied with your
life's quality and will continuously make excuses and feel victimized. And
the most optimal way to curb fear energy is to face it instead of running
away from it. Therefore, we need to become responsible Co-Creators with
our Creator and integrate both Angelic and Demonic powers within us and
master them.
Jesus' "Turn the Other Cheek" phrase from the Sermon on the Mount
(The New Testament) refers to responding to injury without revenge or
allowing more harm. On a more subtle level, it relates to forgiving the
transgressions of others and not standing up for oneself since "God will
handle it." This phrase became the backbone of how the Christian Church
taught its followers to behave. In retrospect, though, the Church
implemented it for political reasons.
It became clear that the Christian Church indoctrinated its followers to
have power and control over them while not having any repercussions for
their evil actions in much of the Dark Ages and beyond. The Church taxed
their people immorally and otherwise oppressed them while burning those at
the stake that defied their laws. They kept the people dumbed down while
waging religious wars and destroying pagan areas to convert them to
Christianity forcefully.
The "Turn the Other Cheek" phrase, incorrectly used by the Christian
Church as a Universal Law, creates weak and timid people who are
"doormats" for others to use since they are taught never to defend their
honour and punish evil being done to them. It leaves all actions in the hands

of God-the Creator, with the hope that justice will arrive naturally and that
we don't need to take part in exacting justice.
The Christian Church taught its followers that Jesus is the Saviour,
whereas Jesus' original teachings were that we are each our own Saviour. In
other words, we are conscious Co-Creators with the Creator and have a
responsibility in manifesting Creation by using our God-given powers and
respecting the Law of Cause and Effect. The Church's misinterpretation was
again for political reasons to take personal power away from the people and
make itself the sole governing force.
According to Qabalistic teachings, one must always maintain a proper
balance between Mercy and Severity. Unbalanced Mercy yields weakness of
mind while unbalanced Severity creates tyranny and oppression. Although
he was erroneously depicted as being only a Pillar of Mercy, Jesus exacted
Severity when necessary. Let us never forget that when he entered the
Temple in Jerusalem and saw merchants and money-changers using it for
financial profit, he turned their tables in a fit of rage to get his point across
that the Temple is a Holy place.
Jesus' "Turn the Other Cheek" Law can be used effectively, as was
shown to us by Mahatma Gandhi, who used non-violence to extricate the
hostile British out of India. The idea behind Jesus' Law is that negative
energy, when projected, bounces right back to you if the other person
becomes neutral by applying love energy and forgiving the transgression as
it's happening. One is meant to become a product of their own negativity if
other people energetically neutralize their immoral treatment.
Jesus' Law can obtain the desired effect if the person applying it is a
highly Spiritually evolved Being like Jesus and Gandhi were who don't
become emotionally triggered when someone disrespects them. However,
this is an impossibility for the commoner since their emotions are instinctual,
and their consciousness experiences duality. Therefore, the common person
must always balance Mercy with Severity and apply each force when
necessary. By punishing evil, we maintain the integrity of the Light in the
world, which furthers the Spiritual Evolution of all of humankind. We are all
each other's judges, healers, and teachers, and this is because we are all
interconnected at the deepest level through the electromagnetic power of our
hearts.

Opening the Heart Chakra

Throughout Ancient history, mystics, Sages, Yogis, Adepts, and
Spiritually advanced humans alike, considered the physical heart the centre
of the Soul. Our Soul is our inner guiding Light, which is linked to the fiery
Star of our Solar System, the Sun. Although the Fire Element corresponds
with the Solar Plexus Chakra, the interplay between Manipura and Anahata
Chakras initiates Solar consciousness. In the Qabalah, Solar consciousness is
represented by the Tiphareth Sephira, whose location is between the Heart
and Solar Plexus Chakras, as it shares correspondences with both.
The physical heart corresponds with the Heart Chakra, Anahata, located
in the middle of the chest. The Heart Chakra is our centre of inner peace,
unconditional love, compassion, truth, harmony, and wisdom. It is our centre
of healing energy which can outwardly be applied through hands-on healing
practices such as Reiki and Ruach Healing. Healing energy is harnessed in
the Heart Chakra but is sent out via the Throat Chakra, which connects to
energy channels in the arms that radiate out to the Palm Chakras.
The Heart Chakra is our Spiritual centre through which we can access
higher vibrational energies. Since the Heart Chakra is between the higher
Spirit Chakras and the lower, Elemental Chakras, the broad spectrum of
these higher vibrational energies becomes fully available to us when our
lower and higher Chakric centres are fully activated, purified, and balanced.
For example, if the higher centres are still relatively closed, less Light will
pour into the lower Chakras from Sahasrara, preventing them from
functioning at their optimal level. As a result, you will have access to
unconditional love, for example, but won’t be able to feel it at the deepest
levels of your Being.
The Heart Chakra is the centre of the Seven Major Chakras, which
harmonizes our masculine and feminine energies. It is our first Chakra of
Non-Duality through which we can experience the Silent Witness within us
that is our Higher Self, or Holy Guardian Angel. The Holy Guardian Angel
resides in Sahasrara but can be experienced through the Heart Chakra if
Vishuddhi and Ajna are open.
Although Manipura (Fire Element) is the Seat of the Soul, unless
Anahata (Air Element) is awakened, the Soul can only experience lower
vibrational energies of Swadhisthana (Water Element) and Muladhara (Earth
Element). As such, the Soul becomes too ingrained in Matter, dimming its
Light and allowing the Ego to take over. When Anahata is awakened, the

Soul obtains access to the Spirit Element, allowing it to undergo a Spiritual
transformation if the higher Chakric centres are open.
If we transpose the Transpersonal Chakras model and the Seven Major
Chakras, we can see that the Heart Chakra is the centre of the entire Chakric
system. Our Cosmic energy source is the Stellar Gateway, which relates to
the Milky Way Galaxy that contains our Solar System among tens of billions
of other Solar Systems. The Milky Way Galaxy is a spiral galaxy, as are
more than two-thirds of all observed galaxies in the Universe.
Cosmic energy emanates from the Stellar Gateway spirally (Figure 59),
encompassing the Earth Star and Soul Star before reaching the Major
Chakras. Our entire Chakric system reflects our Source energy, which is the
Stellar Gateway and the Milky Way Galaxy. We tap into this Fifth
Dimensional Source energy through the Heart Chakra at the centre of the
spiral.

Figure 59: The Heart Chakra Center
When our Heart Chakra is open, we remember our Divinity, which is
deeply inherent. We also recognize the Divinity in all living things around
us, including other humans, animals, and plants, and develop unity
consciousness. Each living thing has a Soul, an individual cell in the body of
a tremendous Cosmic Being that expresses through our Solar System with
the Sun as its centre. In the Qabalah, we refer to this grand Being as Adam
Kadmon, akin to Cosmic Consciousness. Adam Kadmon is the sum of all the
Souls manifested on Earth as the higher consciousness that unites us.

With an open Heart Chakra, we realize that our current existence is part
of a never-ending chain of lives since our Souls are Eternal and will continue
living past physical death. We have lived many different lives before and
will continue to do so once our physical body perishes. We were born with
this knowledge, which allows us to re-integrate faith as part of our existence
when re-activated. And when one has faith and love, they immediately
subdue fear since fear is the absence of faith and love.
Healthy, balanced relationships require us to be open with one another.
An open Heart Chakra makes us generous and kind in word and deed since
we are Spiritual human beings at our core. By experiencing the Spirit energy
through the Heart Chakra, we develop a genuine understanding of other
people’s hardships, allowing us to become merciful and forgiving.
Conversely, an open Heart Chakra gives us the courage to exact severity
when the situation requires it, a term we call "tough love." If we see
someone engaging in immoral activities, taking them off the Spiritual path,
we naturally want to help them, which requires us to use mercy or severity,
depending on the situation.
By becoming Spiritual, we bring joy and bliss into our lives. We also
learn to love and accept ourselves, the good and the bad, which is the first
step towards personal transformation. If we hide from who we are, we lose
our sense of identity, which makes us lose touch with our Souls. As such, we
identify with the Ego and operate solely through its low-level consciousness.
The Ego represents the part of us that is separate from the world. It
lacks empathy and engages in vices, while the Soul is virtuous since it is part
of the Oneness of all of existence. By opening the Heart Chakra, we regain
our connection with the state of Oneness, activating healing within. As such,
all personal traumas, including abandonment, rejection, betrayal, physical
and emotional abuse, begin being purged to integrate Spiritual consciousness
within our hearts.
By healing our inner energies, we also heal issues with the physical
body since diseases are a manifestation of Chakric energy blockages. We can
consciously send healing energy from the Heart Chakra to any part of the
body to heal any imbalances. When we are experiencing physical problems,
it is a sign that our hearts are not open enough; either we don’t love
ourselves enough or we aren’t sufficiently loving towards other people.
Instead of focusing on the disease or ailment, we need to focus on
channelling love energy and becoming a beacon of the Light in the world.

Opening the Heart Chakra allows us to exhibit patience and not expect
immediate rewards for our actions. Patience is a sign that faith has come into
our lives, and we are following a higher path. Integrity, ethics, and a moral
compass become our guiding force instead of being led by the Ego and its
desires. When our hearts lead us, we walk the path of the Light with our
inner truth as our greatest ally. Inner wisdom is awakened, taking us away
from mere logic and reason to rationalize our existence. Instead, we see the
big picture: our ultimate purpose on Earth is to Spiritually evolve and attune
our vibrations with the Cosmic Consciousness of God-the Creator.

Kundalini and Heart Expansions
When the Kundalini blows open the Heart Chakra on its upwards rise, it
maximizes one's heart EMF, which feels like the Self has expanded in all
directions. The immediate effect is a heightened sense of perception and an
awakening of silence's unstruck sound.
The inner sound of silence is an underlying stillness compared to white
noise, a steady humming sound. It is the sound of nothingness, the Void of
Space, which is calming and relaxing when we tune into it. We tune into the
sound of silence when we are deep in meditation, although, with a Heart
Chakra awakening, it becomes more accessible.
As mentioned, the Heart Chakra is the first Chakra of Non-Duality—
when the Kundalini enters it, we become awakened to the present moment,
the Now. This experience immediately takes us out of our heads and into the
heart. We develop a higher sense of awareness, which is quite transcendental
at first, but something we get used to as time goes on.
If the Kundalini rises into the Heart Chakra but not higher, it will drop
back down to Muladhara only to rise again in the future until it pierces the
higher Chakras and completes the awakening process. Once a full Kundalini
awakening occurs, and the energy has penetrated Sahasrara, one's toroidal
field is maximized, resulting in the expansion of consciousness and complete
remodelling of mind, body, and Soul. Since the heart and brain are partners
in the governance and maintenance of consciousness, a transformation in
both follows.
I have already spoken about the process of brain-power activation once
the Kundalini permanently rises into its central area. The brain feels like it
opens up from the inside, awakening latent parts of it. A complete upgrading

process occurs in our CPU as the major brain centres begin to function at a
higher level. The feeling of transparency and weightlessness accompanies
this process, which feels like the head has expanded in all directions.
Heart expansions occur once intense bliss and love enter into the heart.
It is usually not an immediate process since the lower Chakras first have to
be cleansed. If one experiences a spontaneous Kundalini awakening, the
inner fire will naturally purge the lower Chakras over time, allowing the
Spiritual energy to descend into the heart.
Heart expansions relax the muscles and the nervous system, which may
cause a nauseous feeling in the pit of the stomach and weakness in the arms
and legs. The heart EMF can feel so big since the concept of Cosmic
Consciousness is no longer an idea but a permanent part of one's reality. The
Soul feels like it is no longer in the body but present everywhere. One
develops heightened awareness and presence of the environment they are in.
The moment they place their attention on an external object, they become
absorbed in it and can read its energy psychically. This phenomenon results
from the heart EMF expanding exponentially, enabling it to receive a
substantially greater degree of information from the environment.
The increased heart EMF causes a transfiguration in the body,
activating one's latent DNA. Over time, once the body has adjusted to the
inner changes occurring in the consciousness, the heart EMF stabilizes but is
now permanently functioning at a higher level (Figure 60).

Figure 60: Kundalini Awakening and the Heart EMF
The heartbeat becomes more powerful as the body and brain process
more information and work overtime to support the newly expanded
consciousness. During heart and brain expansions and upgrades, it helps to
ground one's electromagnetic field with the Earth's energy field. Being inside
the house can be detrimental since it cuts us off from nature and the Sun's
rays, which boost our vitality and the body's healing ability. Walking
barefoot in nature under the open sky, lying on the grass, and being beside a
body of water are all beneficial in preventing physical fatigue and supporting
a smooth transformation process.
Proper nutrition is crucial, as one should incorporate fruits and
vegetables into their diets to align them with the Planet's energies.
Furthermore, everything natural and organic should be embraced, while that
which isn't should be avoided.

Stimulants such as alcohol and drugs will cause an imbalance in the
nervous system and should be avoided. The intake of coffee should be
moderated as well, even though a cup a day can aid in grounding.
The Thymus Gland plays a significant role in awakening the Heart
Chakra and heart expansions. As mentioned, the Thymus Gland forms part
of our lymphatic system and sits between the heart and sternum. When the
Heart Chakra opens, our immune system is boosted, optimizing our body's
disease-fighting ability. The body no longer needs to spend extra energy
reserves on healing itself but can use that energy to purify the Spiritual
system.
The Thymus Gland wakes up significantly during heart expansions,
often causing immense pressure in the chest. We can alleviate this pressure
by merely tapping the Thymus Gland rhythmically. As the heart is
experiencing an influx of Spirit energy, relaxation and euphoria sweep the
body, often coming in undulating waves. Blood pressure tends to drop in
these instances while histamine and serotonin levels heighten. This situation
signals a time for us to break from everyday life and tend to ourselves and
our needs. Expecting ourselves to perform at 100% will be impossible;
therefore, instead of fighting the process, it is best to accept it and adjust
accordingly.
Heart expansions usually come in phases and can last for weeks,
sometimes months. They may occur once during the Kundalini
transformation process, although it is more common for them to appear
multiple times. The body's equilibrium phase follows heart expansions. The
nervous system balances itself out by raising adrenaline, dopamine, and
serotonin levels and increasing the heart rate, blood pressure and blood
glucose.
Whatever is happening to your body, and no matter where you are in
the Spiritual transformation process, always remember that it is best to
surrender to it. Being relaxed in mind, body, and Soul during this process is
a must since it is futile to rationalize or control it. Complete and absolute
surrender will help us reach the finish line in the shortest time possible and
facilitate the smoothest ride.

PART V:
SEVEN CHAKRAS HEALING
MODALITIES

MALE AND FEMALE CHAKRAS
The Principle of Gender from The Kybalion states, "Gender is in
everything; everything has its Masculine and Feminine Principles, Gender
manifests on all Planes." This Principle implies that every human being has a
dual-energy dynamic, a masculine and feminine component—expressed
through their Seven Major Chakras.
Each of the Major Chakras is associated with masculine or feminine
energy, representing the quality of their essence. Male (Yang) energies
represent active, projective energy, while female (Yin) energies represent
passive and receptive energy. These binary energies are a manifestation of
Shiva and Shakti, the Divine Source of the Masculine and Feminine
Principles. In scientific terms, male energy is comprised of protons, while
female energy is composed of electrons.
Similarly, as all Beings in the Universe have a masculine and feminine
component (regardless of their Soul's gender), so do the Chakras. In other
words, a Chakra is never wholly masculine or feminine but contains aspects
of both. However, each of the Seven Chakras is dominant in one gender as
they express either a positive or negative pole. The two gender poles define
the Chakra's nature and function, which are reversed in the Chakric system
of male and female Souls. I am distinguishing between gender Souls and
bodies since it is not uncommon for a female Soul to be born in a male body
in our modern-day society, and vice versa.
Figure 61 is a schematic that describes the Seven Chakras system and
its various parts and functions. A central energy column inside the body
channels the Light and beams it back and forth between Sahasrara and
Muladhara. Sahasrara projects upwards towards the Soul Star, while
Muladhara projects downwards towards the Earth Star.
Each Chakra between Sahasrara and Muladhara has a front and back
portion that projects outwards. When the Chakra is working well, it casts
further out, while when its energy is stagnant, its projection reaches a shorter
distance. The Chakra stops its spinning when it is blocked, and its projection
is closer to the body. Use the Figure 61 schematic as a reference for the
Spiritual Healing methods in this section, namely energy work with Crystal
Wands and Tuning Forks.

Figure 61: The Seven Male and Female Chakras

Since each Chakra is a wheel of spinning energy, it can rotate either
clockwise or counterclockwise, spiralling outwards at a ninety-degree angle
to the body. The direction in which a Chakra spins is something inherent in
us since birth. The origin of the opposite spin of male and female Chakras
begins in Sahasrara, alternating as we go downwards through the Chakras.
As such, each of us is either positive or negative, male or female energy
dominant. The males reside more in their First, Third, and Fifth Chakras, in
which they are dominant, while females operate from their Second, Fourth,
and Sixth Chakras.
Keep in mind, though, the direction of spin of our male and female
Chakras is not fixed. Any Chakra can either be in the act of projecting or
receiving, which affects its direction of spin. Chakras are like cogs in a
machine where each wheel relates to every other wheel. They work together
as parts of an engine or a clock, where every piece of machinery affects
every other component, and everything must be in synch to make the device
work. Similarly, each Chakra must spin smoothly and at a similar speed as
every other Chakra to give coherence to the whole energy system.
The challenge for males and females is to bring their Chakras into
balance by working with their non-dominant Chakras. We can achieve
Chakric balance through Spiritual Healing methods but also by falling in
love. When two people of opposite Soul polarities fall in love, their
complementing energies allow them to achieve unification in their masculine
and feminine polarities, giving rise to a higher state of consciousness.
Falling in love is highly beneficial to one's Spiritual Evolution, which
explains why it is so sought after in our society.
Whether a Chakra is of a masculine or feminine quality, its power gets
optimized when it spends more time spinning clockwise. As you see in
Figure 61, the Chakra is dominant when the spin is in the clockwise
direction. Energy is projecting outwards in a clockwise spin, allowing the
inner Light to flow through the Chakric system more efficiently. The inner
Light is essentially what powers the Chakra—the more Light one carries, the
more powerful their Chakras will be. Conversely, when a Chakra is
receiving energy, it rotates counterclockwise. In this case, its power doesn't
get fully utilized since it is drawing energy from the environment instead of
using its own energy source.
For the Chakras to be kept healthy and balanced, one should never
spend too much time pulling in energy from the outside since unknown,

foreign energies can easily block a Chakra, especially if they have a low
vibrational frequency. A blocked Chakra causes stagnation in the energy
flow of the Aura and can even cause physical disease over time. Conversely,
constantly projecting energy outwards without spending the necessary time
grounding and Self-reflecting can deplete one's Aura of vital Pranic energy,
exhausting the mind, body, and Soul.
In the case of a full Kundalini awakening, however, when the individual
has established a permanent connection with Sahasrara, they channel a
greater degree of Light energy into their optimized six Chakras below,
enabling them to be a natural healer to others. Individuals are naturally
drawn to Kundalini awakened people—one is being healed simply by being
in their presence.
On a side note, to maintain healthy relationships, there should always
be an equal give and take energetically. We should feel rejuvenated by
spending time with others instead of feeling depleted. Those people that take
too much energetically without giving anything back (whether they are
doing it consciously or not) are termed "energy vampires." The concept of
vampirism came from this type of selfish energy exchange between people;
if we are open to taking love energy from others, we should be open to
giving our love energy back to them as well.

Gender Characteristics of the Chakras
As the source of the raw energy of physicality and action, Muladhara,
the Root Chakra, is masculine (positive) in nature, spinning clockwise in
males and counterclockwise in females. For females, Muladhara is in the
receiving mode; for males, however, it is in the act of giving out energy. For
this reason, males are generally the more dominant gender involved in
physical activities such as manual labour and competitive sports.
Swadhisthana, the Sacral Chakra, the source of one's emotions, is
feminine (negative) in nature; it spins counterclockwise in men and
clockwise in women. Swadhisthana is in the receptive mode for males and
projective mode for females. Since Swadhisthana is more dominant in
females, it is no wonder they are generally the more emotional of the two
genders.
As the source of willpower, Manipura, the Solar Plexus Chakra, is of
the masculine (positive) energy, spinning clockwise in men and
counterclockwise in women. Manipura is in the receiving mode for women,

while it gives out energy for men. Manipura's dominance in males has led to
an obsession with power and control, as shown historically in the history of
wars males have waged with one another. On a positive note, the male
warrior energy has made them the protector and provider in the family
household since time immemorial.
The source of compassion and love, Anahata, the Heart Chakra, is
feminine (negative) in nature, and it spins counterclockwise in men and
clockwise in women. Anahata is in the act of receiving for males and the
mode of projecting for females. Females are associated with nurturing and
caregiving. They can go with the flow of life instead of controlling every
facet of their existence. Since females dominate the Heart and Sacral
Chakras, intimacy is much more accessible to them than males. Most
females are generally the heart of their romantic relationships, while males
struggle with their feelings.
Vishuddhi, the Throat Chakra, the centre of one's expression, is of the
masculine (positive) energy; it spins clockwise in men and counterclockwise
in women. Since males are dominant in the Throat Chakra, it is not
uncommon for them to be more aligned with purpose and expression than
females, who tend to be more introverted.
Being the centre of one's intuition, Ajna, the Mind's Eye, is feminine
(negative) in nature, spinning counterclockwise in men and clockwise in
women. In men, Ajna is in the act of receiving, while in women, it is in the
mode of giving out. As such, females are known to have higher psychic
senses than males. Throughout history, it is no wonder that women were the
seers and Oracles since they were a better channel for energies from the
Higher Planes.
Sahasrara is gender-neutral as it is the source of Divine Light. The
positive and negative poles merge into one unified energy, making Sahasrara
the only Major Chakra that is Non-Dual. In males, this Chakra spins
clockwise, while in females, it spins counterclockwise. Sahasrara is the
source of the Divine Masculine and Divine Feminine energies. For both
genders, Sahasrara is in the act of giving out the Divine Light energy and
projecting it into the Chakras below.
The roles and designations between the genders mentioned above are in
no way fixed, nor do they determine a human being's strengths and
weaknesses. Many male and female individuals have optimized the Chakras
they aren't naturally dominant in and thrive in areas that are less common for

people of their gender. Free Will supersedes all energetic dispositions and
societal conditioning; with focus and determination, human beings can
develop themselves into anything they want to be.

Balancing the Chakras
When it comes to Spiritual Healing, it helps to know which Chakras we
are naturally dominant in. We can develop our non-dominant Chakras and
achieve greater balance in our overall energy system by having this
knowledge. After all, the key to maximizing one's potential is to balance the
masculine and feminine energies within the body. With that in mind, when
working with the Chakras through Spiritual Healing practices, females
should focus on the masculine, odd Chakras (First, Third, Fifth), while males
should focus on the feminine, even Chakras (Second, Fourth, Sixth).
When a Chakra is overactive (in excess of energy) or if a Chakra is
underactive and deficient in energy, we can apply the masculine and
feminine principles to bring that Chakra into balance. For example, since
Swadhisthana Chakra has feminine energy, an imbalance in this Chakra
means that one has either an excessive amount of feminine energy or is
deficient in masculine energy. If the individual feels overly emotional, they
need to apply masculine energy in their Sacral Chakra for balance. If they
are cold and aloof and out of touch with their emotions, they should use
feminine energy.
Since Manipura Chakra has a masculine quality, if the individual feels
an excess of energy that makes them agitated and angry, it is a sign that the
Chakra is overactive and needs feminine energy applied to bring it into
balance. Conversely, if the individual is out of touch with their willpower,
they need to use the masculine energy to restore its balance.
Whether masculine or feminine, every Chakra spins in the clockwise
direction when it is overactive and counterclockwise when it is underactive.
Therefore, to optimize a Chakra, we must find the correct balance between
its projective and receptive functions. However, as mentioned, for the
individual to channel their inner Light, the Chakras should be projecting
energy more than receiving. Doing so will strengthen the connection with
the Soul.

ASTROLOGY AND THE SEVEN CHAKRAS
Astrology is an Ancient science that examines the movements and
relative positions of the Heavenly bodies (Planets) in our Solar System.
Astrology was at the heart of all sciences, philosophy, medicine, and Magick
for our early Ancestors. According to them, the outer Universe (Macrocosm)
was reflected in the human experience (Microcosm)—As Above, So Below.
They believed that by studying the Star Constellations and the Planets, they
could divine human affairs, heal the body, and even predict events here on
Earth.
Astrologers believe that every human being is influenced by the Planets
and the Zodiac signs they were in when they were born. They call the
blueprint of these energetic influences our Horoscope, or Birth Chart. Our
Horoscope gives us a map of the energies that comprise our overall Self. At
birth, Zodiacal energies become locked into our Aura, powering the Chakras
and influencing our desires, aspirations, motivations, likes and dislikes, and
behavioural tendencies. The Stars provide us with the Karmic lessons we
need to Spiritually evolve in this lifetime.
The essence of Astrology lies in understanding the meaning of the
Planets since they rule the Zodiac Signs and Twelve Houses. In other words,
the forces of the Star Constellations manifest through the Planets. Every
human being is made up of different combinations and degrees of the
Planets' energies. The Seven Ancient Planets act as relay stations for the
reception and transmission of Stellar energies. They correspond with the
Seven Chakras, while the Twelve Zodiac signs represent the masculine and
feminine, day (Solar) and night (Lunar) aspects of the Seven Ancient Planets
(Figure 62). Therefore, by gauging our Birth Chart, we can determine the
characteristics of our Chakras that shape our character and personality.
The Birth Chart is a snapshot in time, a blueprint of who we are and
who we can become. When examining the Birth Chart, one needs to pay
particular attention to the Sun, Moon and Rising (Ascendant) Signs. These
three signs give us extraordinary insight into our Chakric focus in life, the
strengths we can build on, and weaknesses and limitations we can improve
and overcome to evolve Spiritually.

An individual’s Elemental breakdown in their Birth Chart also
determines how much masculine or feminine energy they embody, which
impacts their psychology. However, their physical appearance is affected by
their Ascendant and the Planets that fall in the First House. For example, if
someone has Jupiter in their First House, the individual may struggle with
weight gain, while if they have Mars, their physical body will be toned and
muscular. These associations have much to do with the ruling Chakras of the
Planets, which will be explored in detail in this chapter.

Western Astrology vs. Vedic Astrology
Since the advent of Astrology, which is as old as humanity itself, many
Astrological systems have been invented to study and divine the Stars.
However, the two most notable ones that have stood the test of time are
Western Astrology and Vedic Astrology.
Vedic, Hindu, or Indian Astrology, otherwise called "Jyotish Shastra"
("Science of Light" in Sanskrit), is different and more complex than Western
Astrology. Vedic Astrology is rooted in the Vedas and is at least 5000 years
old. It uses the Sidereal Zodiac, which is based upon the position of Star
Constellations in the night sky that serve as a backdrop for the moving
Planets. Ancient cultures like the Egyptians, Persians, and Mayans used the
Sidereal system to predict future events accurately.
In contrast, Western Astrology is based on the Tropical Zodiac, which
is geocentric; it follows the Earth's orientation to the Sun, where the Zodiac
Signs are set upon the ecliptic. Western Astrology is aligned with the
changes in seasons; Aries is the first Zodiac since it coincides with the first
day of spring on the Vernal (Spring) Equinox, as the Sun crosses the celestial
equator going north. So, Aries starts off the Solar year, while Pisces finishes
it year in and year out. Most of the modern world has adopted the Tropical
or Solar calendar to count time because of its consistency in matching the
changes in seasons.
Therefore, Western Astrology evaluates a person's birth using the
alignments of the Stars and Planets from the Earth’s perspective, instead of
in space like in Vedic Astrology. Western Astrology originated in Ancient
Greece with Ptolemy approximately 2000 years ago. However, it was a
continuation of Hellenistic and Babylonian traditions.
Since the Earth wobbles and tilts around 23.5 degrees from the equator,
it causes a 1 degree shift every 72 years, which we refer to as the

"Precession of the Equinoxes." This means that the Vernal Equinox comes
20 minutes early every year and one day early every 72 years. While Vedic
Astrology accounts for this variance, Western Astrology does not. So, while
Vedic Astrology is moveable and gives results basically in "real-time" of the
configuration of Star Constellations, Western Astrology is fixed and doesn't
account for these changes in the night sky.
Here is where it gets tricky, though. Although the two systems were
aligned at the advent of the Tropical Zodiac some 2000 years ago, the dates
for the Sun Signs have changed over the years in Vedic Astrology, while in
Western Astrology, they stayed the same. So, for example, at present, Aries
begins on April 13th (this number varies) in the Sidereal Zodiac, while in the
Tropical Zodiac, Aries maintains its arrival on March 21st.
Therefore, although the Twelve Zodiacal Signs share the same
characteristics and traits, since their dates differ, you may get an entirely
different readout in your Birth Chart. Also, although not an official part of
either system, since its Constellation touches upon the ecliptic, Ophiuchus
the "Serpent-Bearer" has sometimes been suggested as the thirteenth Zodiac
Sign in Sidereal Astrology. It falls between Scorpio and Sagittarius from
November 29th to December 18th.
Another essential difference between the two systems is that Western
Astrology utilizes the three outer Planets in our Solar System, Uranus,
Neptune, and Pluto, as part of the Planetary framework. In contrast, Vedic
Astrology (mirroring Ancient Alchemy and Hermetic Qabalah) only focuses
on the Seven Ancient Planets. However, it includes the North and South
Nodes of the Moon (Rahu and Ketu), for a total of nine Heavenly bodies
(Deities), called the "Navagrahas" (Sanskrit for "Nine Planets."). According
to Hindu beliefs, the Navagrahas influence humanity collectively and
individually. Therefore, it is not uncommon to see Hindus worship the
Navagrahas in their homes to overcome adversity or misfortune arising from
past Karmas.
Western Astrology emphasizes the position of the Sun in a specific Sun
Sign. At the same time, Vedic Astrology emphasizes the position of the
Moon and the Ascendant (Lagna in Sanskrit). In addition, it includes the
"Nakshatras" (Lunar Mansions), which is unique to this system. Also, the
Twelve Houses are part of the Vedic Astrology Birth Chart, while they are
secondary in Western Astrology. The Solar-based system of Western
Astrology is arguably better at evaluating the personality and characteristics

of a person and the Planetary influences on behaviour and perceptions. In
contrast, the Lunar-based Vedic Astrology system is better at giving one
insight into their destiny and fate because of its accuracy in predicting the
future. In other words, the Western Astrologer is more of a psychologist,
while the Vedic Astrologer is more of a seer or diviner.
As a final note on this topic, having studied Western Astrology my
entire life, I can attest to its validity and accuracy concerning my own
personality traits and characteristics and other people I have come across.
Also, since Hermeticism is the primary influence on all my work, I
recognize the importance of the Sun's Light and its effects on life on Earth
and our inner Spiritual nature and give it precedence over all things. For this
reason, the seasonal attribution of the Zodiacal Signs always made sense to
me since their placement reflected the metaphoric life, death, and rebirth of
the Sun from the Earth's point of view.
My interest in Astrology has always been a form of transpersonal
psychology instead of predicting future events in my life. As such, Western
Astrology has been of great benefit to me. However, if your interest in
Astrology is primarily as a form of divination, you will find Vedic Astrology
more beneficial. Having said that, I think that neither system has the ultimate
answers. Therefore, to fully understand Astrology, you should familiarize
yourself with both systems, which many earnest Astrologers do.

The Seven Ancient Planets
The Seven Major Chakras correspond with the Seven Ancient Planets
in the following way: Muladhara relates to Saturn, Swadhisthana to Jupiter,
Manipura to Mars, Anahata to Venus, Vishuddhi to Mercury, Ajna to the
Moon, and Sahasrara to the Sun (Figure 62).
By placing the Planets in their Chakric positions, we get an almost
exact sequence of their order in our Solar System. The only variance is the
Moon, placed second after the Sun instead of being between Venus and
Mars, alongside the Earth.
On the Qabalistic Tree of Life, the Moon is the first Sephira (Yesod) we
encounter when going inwards. Since it reflects the Sun's Light, it
corresponds with visual thoughts projected through the Mind's Eye—our
doorway or portal into the inner Cosmic Planes or Realms. The Moon
represents the Astral Plane, reflecting the Spiritual reality that the Sun
generates on the other end of the spectrum.

In Alchemical symbology, the Moon and Sun were always pictured
together as representatives of the Universal feminine and masculine
energies. The interplay of Sun and Moon energies is found at the foundation
of all Creation as Soul and consciousness—the Fire and Water Elements.
Consequently, the placement of the Seven Ancient Planets on the
Chakric tree almost mirrors their arrangement on the Qabalistic Tree of Life,
although in reverse. If we substitute the Planet Earth in place of the Sun, we
have the Moon next, followed by Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn.
As mentioned before, the Light of the Sun is the origin of our Souls.
The association between the Earth and the Sun implies that the Spiritual
reality is reflected in the material reality and vice versa. The two are merely
opposite aspects of the One.
If the Sun represents the Soul, then the Planets are the Soul's higher
powers that manifest through their associated Chakras. They are the various
components of the inner Self and the source of all virtues, morals, and ethics
that comprise our character. As stated in The Magus, through our connection
with the Planets and their cycles around the Sun, we are a "perfect
Microcosm of the Macrocosm—a Mini Solar System which reflects the
grand Solar System in which we have our physical existence."
As each of the Seven Ancient Planets corresponds with one of the
Seven Chakras, each Chakra displays the nature of its ruling Planet. This
association is helpful to know when examining our Horoscope or Birth
Chart. Since life is continuous, the positioning of the Planets reflects the
required powers we need to overcome our Karmic energy from previous
lifetimes.
Depending on which Zodiac Sign a Planet was aligned with the
moment an individual was born, some Planets are malefic, while others are
benign in one’s Birth Chart. This is because of the relationship between
Planets and the rulers of the Zodiac Signs in which they are located. Planets
are strong in signs of their friends while being neutral in strength in neutral
Signs. Conversely, they are weak in the Signs of their enemies. As such, the
Planetary, Cosmic radiations can either positively or negatively impact their
associated Chakras in the Body of Light. If any of our Planets are weak in
our Birth Chart, its corresponding Chakra will also be weak. When Chakras
are weak and (or) blocked, health issues related to that Chakra are caused.
On a final note, most Western Astrologers include the outer Planets in
their Horoscope models. They equate Pluto to the feminine side of the Mars

Chakra (Scorpio), Neptune to the feminine side of the Jupiter Chakra
(Pisces), and Uranus to the masculine side of the Saturn Chakra (Aquarius).
The North and South Nodes of the Moon are often included as well.
They are called Caput and Cauda Draconis in Latin—the Head and Tail of
the Dragon. Generally speaking, the North Node relates to our fate and
destiny in this life, while the South Node relates to the Karma we bring into
this incarnation from past lives.
The following is the description of the Planetary powers with relation to
their associated Chakras. For a more thorough exposition on Western
Astrology’s Planetary and Zodiacal correspondences, consult The Magus.
The Astrological knowledge presented herein complements the information
on the same subject in my previous book.
Saturn/Muladhara
Saturn (Shani in Sanskrit) is the slowest moving Planet in our Solar
System, which is why it is associated with lessons in life that relate to the
passage of time. It is the Planet of self-control, responsibility, diligence, and
discipline, all of which give structure to our lives. Its energy is grounding,
like the Earth Element it represents. Saturn represents the masculine
Muladhara Chakra.
Saturn allows us to see the truth of the matter and align with it. As such,
it is very much concerned with integrity. Saturnalian energy affects our
ability to manifest our life’s dreams and goals, inspiring us to take on the
world head-on. It also affects our boundaries and restrictions, allowing us to
live within society’s constraints in a healthy yet productive manner.
Saturn contains an Airy quality; it stimulates intuition and a deep
knowingness of a higher reality that rules over the Universe. After all, it is
the Planet of faith and Karma. A strong influence of Saturnalian energy
enables us to prioritize our Spiritual Evolution over material gains.
In terms of the body, Saturn governs all things related to our physical
structure, including the skeletal system, teeth, cartilage, glands, hair, and
skin. Too little Saturnalian energy in Muladhara will make us ungrounded
and unable to support ourselves. A lack of discipline and ambition can make
us inert and internally conflicted, preventing us from achieving the goals we
set for ourselves. On the other hand, too much Saturn and a person can
become overly ambitious, selfish, inflexible, and pessimistic.
Saturn has a friendly relationship with Mercury and Venus in a Birth
Chart while being enemies with Mars and neutral with Jupiter. In addition, it

rules the two steadfast and trustworthy signs in the Zodiac, Aquarius
(Kumbha in Sanskrit) and Capricorn (Makara in Sanskrit). Aquarius
represents the masculine energy of Saturn, while Capricorn represents its
feminine energy. While Aquarius is concerned with the expression of the
conservative force in life, Capricorn is involved in stabilizing it.
If either of these two signs is prominent in your Birth Chart, mainly if
they are found as your Sun Sign, Moon Sign, or Rising Sign (Ascendant),
you should pay attention to Muladhara Chakra. Aquarius’ and Capricorns
often receive either too much or too little Saturnalian energy and require
Spiritual work on Muladhara to balance it.

Figure 62: Chakric Positions of the Seven Ancient Planets
Jupiter/Swadhisthana

The Planet Jupiter (Brihaspati or Guru in Sanskrit) is an expansive and
bountiful Planet that brings good fortune, abundance, and success. It is
related to the Water Element and represents the higher qualities of
consciousness whose base energy is unconditional love. Jupiter corresponds
with the feminine Swadhisthana Chakra.
Jupiter’s benevolent energy inspires Self-confidence, optimism,
cooperation with others, and the protective impulse. Jupiterian energy builds
virtues that shape our character and connect with our Higher Selves. It gives
us a strong sense of morality and ethics and allows us to grow in society and
be an asset to others. Jupiter instils a sense of compassion, mercy, and
generosity within us, making us just and honourable in our words and
actions. Luck, happiness, and good health are all aspects of Jupiter. It
governs the growth of the physical body, including cellular development and
the preservation of soft tissues.
Jupiter is the teacher that gives us inner wisdom and inspires us to
develop a philosophical outlook in life. Its positive energy makes us friendly,
cheerful, and generally well-liked by others. It allows us to see the positive
in all situations, which gives success in business ventures.
If Swadhisthana is deficient in Jupiterian energy, suppression of
emotions and sexuality ensues, negatively affecting creativity, selfconfidence, and one’s sense of personal identity. Too little Jupiterian energy
can make us pessimistic, dishonest, timid, shy, and generally unlucky in life.
Conversely, too much Jupiter can make us blindly optimistic, extravagant,
and lazy. The downside of things coming too easy in life is that we cannot
develop strength of character.
In a Birth Chart, Jupiter is friends with the Sun, Moon, and Mars, while
enemies with Mercury and Venus and neutral with Saturn. In addition,
Jupiter rules Sagittarius (Dhanus in Sanskrit) and Pisces (Mina in Sanskrit),
both highly moral signs. Sagittarius represents the masculine energy of
Jupiter, while Pisces represents its feminine energy. While Sagittarius
manifests the creative energy in life, Pisces expresses it. People who have
either of these two signs in their Birth Chart should pay attention to
Swadhisthana Chakra and its functioning. If they are unbalanced in their
intake of Jupiterian energy, they may require Spiritual work to optimise this
Chakra.
Mars/Manipura

The Planet Mars (Mangala, Angaraka, or Kuja in Sanskrit) is the fuel of
the willpower which initiates action and change. It represents the Fire
Element, corresponding with the masculine Manipura Chakra. Mars is the
Planet of physical energy that governs the sex drive. It is the source of our
personal power that provides strength and courage to the mind, body, and
Soul.
Mars is exciting and dynamic; it gives us mental fortitude and makes us
competitive with other human beings. Moreover, since it is the Fire Element,
it allows us to build strong beliefs that aid in finding our life’s purpose and
the drive to carry it out.
Mars also gives us enthusiasm, passion, and the ability to take on
challenges in life and overcome them through determination and persistence.
It facilitates inner growth and the change necessary to continue to evolve.
Martian energy is heavily focused on inner transformation since the Fire
Element consumes the old to make room for the new.
As the Red Planet, Mars governs the red blood cells and oxidation in
the body. If Manipura receives too much Martian energy, individuals can
become destructive to themselves and others. As such, they may turn to
anger, rage, tyranny, oppression and even violence. Therefore, Jupiter should
always balance Mars—the Ego must be held in check by the Soul and its
higher aspirations. Conversely, too little Martial energy results in being
intimidated, apprehensive, cowardly, doubtful, overly changeable in personal
beliefs, lacking passion and drive, and generally indifferent to life’s
outcomes.
In a Birth Chart, Mars has a friendly relationship with the Sun, Moon,
and Jupiter, while being enemies with Mercury and neutral with Venus and
Saturn. In addition, the two very ambitious and action-driven signs, Aries
(Mesha in Sanskrit) and Scorpio (Vrishchika in Sanskrit), are ruled by Mars.
Aries represents the masculine energy of Mars, while Scorpio represents its
feminine energy. While Aries governs our projection of vitality, Scorpio
affects its preservation. If either of these two signs is prominent in your Birth
Chart, you should give attention to Manipura Chakra and ascertain its level
of functioning. To optimise Manipura, you will require a balanced ray of
Martian energy.
Venus/Anahata
The Planet Venus (Shukra in Sanskrit) is the Planet of love, desire, and
pleasure. Venus is a joyful and benign Planet that brings luck in friendships

and romantic relationships. It rules over our capacity to accept and express
affection and enjoy beauty. Its energy gives us sex appeal since it rules the
seductive arts. Since love affects our level of inspiration and imagination,
Venus fuels right-brained, abstract thinking. It governs artistic expressions
such as music, visual arts, dance, drama, and poetry.
Venus relates to the feminine Anahata Chakra and the Air Element,
which governs our thoughts. Desires are either the by-product of lower
vibrational thoughts of the Ego or higher-vibrational thoughts of the Soul.
Venus has an affinity to the Fire Element; desire can easily turn into passion
which fuels creativity. It also has an affinity to the Water Element since love
is a powerful emotion. Remember, Air fuels both the Fire and Water
Elements and gives them life.
Since Anahata is the bridge between the lower three Elemental Chakras
and the higher three Spirit Chakras, Venus teaches us to love without
attachment to transcend our individuality and merge with the Spirit whose
essence is Divine Love. Venetian energy allows us to clear the emotional
attachments to money, sex, and power created by the lower three Chakras.
Doing so facilitates exploring the Spirit Element's expansive qualities that
we can experience through the higher three Chakras, giving us more
profound levels of understanding.
Venus is a tactile Planet, so it governs the body's sensory organs. A low
dose of Venetian energy in Anahata Chakra results in unhealthy
relationships, extreme attachment to worldly things, self-indulgence, and
creative blockages. A deficiency in Venetian energy creates the fear of not
being loved, making us insecure.
When the higher Chakras are utilized, the individual can love
unconditionally. However, when the lower Chakras are dominant, love turns
to lust which can be destructive to the Soul if not balanced by Mercury and
its reasoning powers.
In a Birth Chart, Venus is friends with Mercury and Saturn, being
enemies with the Sun and Moon and neutral with Mars and Jupiter. In
addition, the two social and pleasure-oriented signs, Libra (Tula in Sanskrit)
and Taurus (Vrishabha in Sanskrit) are ruled by Venus. Libra represents the
masculine energy of Venus, while Taurus represents its feminine energy.
While Libra represents our capacity to express emotions, Taurus governs our
emotional receptivity. If either of these two signs is influential in your Birth

Chart, be mindful of Anahata Chakra to ensure it is receiving an equilibrated
ray of Venetian energy.
Mercury/Vishuddhi
Mercury (Budha in Sanskrit) is the Planet of logic, reason, and
communication, corresponding with the masculine Vishuddhi Chakra and
the Spirit Element. Since it relates to thought processes, Mercury has an
affinity to the Air Element; its correct designation would be Air of Spirit.
Mercury also rules travel and the desire to experience new environments.
As Mercury rules intelligence, it influences how a person thinks and the
characteristics of their mind. Mercury tempers Venus and gives structure to
creative thoughts and ideas. Both hemispheres of the brain are affected by
Mercury, although it is dominant in the left hemisphere that deals with linear
thinking through logic and reason.
Mercury rules the brain, nerves, and respiratory system. Since it
governs verbal and non-verbal communication, such as body language,
Mercury affects our ability to express our thoughts. A strong influence of
Mercury gives us good memory and excellent speaking and writing skills. It
turns us into captivating storytellers and clever and cunning bargainers.
Since it rules the voice, it gives us the power to speak and perform in public.
Mercury reflects how we see, hear, understand, and assimilate
information. Too little Mercurial energy renders Vishuddhi inactive, closing
ourselves off from the subtle intuitive information imparted to us by the
higher Chakras. People who are low in Mercurial energy lose the ability to
express their inner truth, making them lose touch with reality and live in
illusion.
A deficiency in Mercurial energy often results in wrong decision
making since we must think intelligently before acting. Also, if we don't
balance our emotions with logic and reason, neurotic behaviour can ensue.
Our ability to plan things out in our minds affects how well we can manifest
our goals and dreams and whether our results will be fruitful.
Conversely, too much Mercury can make individuals sarcastic,
argumentative, manipulative, and overly critical of themselves and others.
Lies and deceit indicate an unbalanced Mercury, which blocks Vishuddhi
Chakra while speaking the truth optimizes it.
Mercury has a friendly relationship with the Sun and Venus in
Astrology while being enemies with the Moon and neutral with Mars,
Jupiter, and Saturn. In addition, Mercury governs the two highly

communicative signs of Gemini (Mithuna in Sanskrit) and Virgo (Kanya in
Sanskrit). Gemini represents the masculine energy of Mercury, while Virgo
represents its feminine energy. While Gemini is involved in the expression
of ideas, Virgo governs our intake of impressions. Pay attention to Vishuddhi
Chakra if you have either of these two signs in your Birth Chart. It indicates
the utilization of Mercurial energy and this Chakra's need for equilibrium.
The Moon/Ajna
The Moon Planet (Chandra in Sanskrit) is the Planet of instincts,
illusions, and involuntary emotions projected by the subconscious. It is
highly influential on higher mental abilities such as introspection,
contemplation, self-examination, and intuition because it reflects deep
thoughts and emotions. The Moon affects our perceptions of reality since
everything we take in must pass through the subconscious mind. Its
influence affects the five senses of sight, hearing, taste, smell, and touch.
The Moon corresponds with the feminine Ajna Chakra and the Spirit
Element. However, it is affiliated with the Water Element—its correct
designation would be Water of Spirit. Ajna has an intimate connection with
Swadhisthana, as both carry out the subconscious mind's functions that
control the voluntary and involuntary emotions.
The Moon rules the night as the Sun rules the day. It governs dreams,
giving clarity to visual images. As such, it impacts our imagination and
creative thinking as well. The Moon is nurturing with a strong influence on
growth, fertility, and conception. It is highly changeable; one moment, we
can be cold and aloof while under the Moon's control, and the next moment
we become intensely passionate.
In the Horoscope, the Moon Sign reflects our inner, emotional Self and
is second in importance only to the Sun Sign. As the Sun is expressive of our
character, the Moon expresses our personality. Since it regulates the ebb and
flow of all bodies of water, the Moon rules all bodily fluids and affects the
fluctuations in emotions.
The Moon is our inner core that experiences emotional reactions to
environmental stimuli. Since it represents the subconscious, the Moon is the
part of our personality that we may find disturbing about ourselves. It gives
rise to strange, often immoral fantasies and daydreams and elicits instinctual
reactions like hate and jealousy. On the other hand, the Moon also affects our
call for spontaneity and desire for sensual pleasures. As two feminine
Planets, the Moon and Venus have an affinity.

If the individual's Ajna Chakra is deficient in Lunar energy, their visual
thoughts become dim and unclear, negatively impacting imagination,
creativity, and level of inspiration. A low powered Ajna Chakra severs one's
connection with intuition and deep emotions, allowing fear and anxiety to
take over. The individual no longer has inner guidance, which renders them
incapable of learning from life's experiences, bringing a general sense of
hopelessness and depression. Low Lunar energy in Ajna Chakra also
negatively impacts dreams as they become dull, blurred, and otherwise
obscure. An efficient method of receiving Lunar energy is to spend time
outside on a full Moon.
In Astrology, the Moon is friendly with the Sun and Mercury while
neutral with Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn. It has no enemies. The Moon
governs the intuitive and sensitive sign, Cancer (Kataka in Sanskrit), which
is of a feminine energy quality. If Cancer is prominent in your Birth Chart,
pay attention to Ajna Chakra and its functioning. It may require balancing
the ray of Lunar energy through Spiritual Healing practices.
The Sun/Sahasrara
The Sun Planet (Surya in Sanskrit) is the Planet of imagination,
inspiration, Spirituality, and transcendence. The Sun is the source of Pranic
energy that gives life, Light, and warmth to all living things in our Solar
System. All Souls in our Solar System emanate from and rely upon the Sun
for sustenance.
The Sun corresponds with the Non-Dual Sahasrara Chakra and the
Spirit Element. As the Sun is the Light source for our Solar System,
Sahasrara is our Chakric Light source. The White Light is our source of
Oneness, truth, and Universal wisdom. It represents the conscious mind, as
the Moon represents the subconscious.
The Sun not only generates Light but also heat. Hence, it is affiliated
with the Fire Element; its correct denomination is Fire of Spirit, implying
that although it is beyond duality, it has a propensity towards the projective,
masculine principle.
Love energy generates a calm and steady heat, whose essence is White
Light. Therefore, when we use the term "Cosmic Consciousness," we refer
to Sun-consciousness as our Solar System's source of love, Light, life, and
Divine bliss.

The Sun is the fundamental expression of the individual's identity—the
I. As such, it is the most critical influence in our Horoscope. It represents
who we are and the essence of our Soul. Therefore, the Sun Sign is our
foundational energy that influences our character and highest aspirations.
The Sun gives one excellent leadership abilities. It governs the heart,
regulating our circulatory system. The Sun also gives us vitality, harmony,
and equilibrium, as it balances all the opposite energies in the body. If we are
deficient in the energy of the Sun, we experience blockages in Sahasrara,
negatively affecting our entire Chakric system. Low levels of Light energy
in the Chakric system slow down the Chakras' spin, manifesting mental,
emotional, and physical issues.
The ideal way to receive Sun energy is to spend time outside on a sunny
day and allow the Sun's rays to nourish your Chakras, fueling your Aura
with Pranic energy. The Sun is our energy system's battery source; without
it, we would perish. A full Kundalini awakening optimises Sahasrara
Chakra, maximising our connection with the Sun, allowing us to access our
Sun Sign's full potential.
In the Zodiac, the Sun has a friendly relationship with the Moon, Mars,
and Jupiter, while enemies with Venus and Saturn and neutral with Mercury.
The Sun rules the authoritative sign, Leo (Simha in Sanskrit), whose base
energy is of a masculine quality. Cancer and Leo, the signs of the Moon and
the Sun, represent the basic polarity of the mind in terms of emotions and
reason, the subconscious and conscious Self. Notice if you have Leo in your
Birth Chart and how Solar energy is affecting Sahasrara Chakra. You may
need Spiritual Healing to balance your Solar current and optimise this
essential Chakra.

SPIRITUAL HEALING AND EVOLUTION
As we enter the Age of Aquarius, Spiritual Evolution (Figure 63) has
become of utmost importance to humanity. Since the advent of the internet
and free information sharing, our collective consciousness has evolved to
understand that God is not outside of us but within. As a result, existential
questions that relate to our purpose in life and how to achieve real and
lasting happiness have taken precedence over our quest for accruing material
wealth.
The major world religions have become outdated, as all religions do
after some time. They no longer hold the answers for the new generation of
humans, and many are looking for alternate Spiritual methods and
techniques to connect with God-the Creator. Irrespective of what religion
they are born into, people have become open to trying new and old Spiritual
healing practices, so long as those practices provide the results they seek.
Falling into the heading of "healing modalities," these alternative
therapeutic techniques aim at balancing the mind, body, Soul in an
integrative way while promoting Spiritual Evolution. Therefore, they are
very appealing to Spiritual people and those looking for alternate methods to
treat issues at both energetic and bodily levels.
Even though we all have the same energetic foundation, we have
different inclinations. Some of us are drawn to certain Spiritual healing
practices while being repelled by others. Our Ancestral energy has much to
do with this propensity, as does our environmental conditioning. For this
reason, it has been my goal the past four years to present the most optimal
Western and Eastern Spiritual healing modalities in Serpent Rising and The
Magus. I wanted to give people options and give them the most practical
instructions on applying these Spiritual practices in their everyday lives.
Before covering the science and philosophy of Yoga, I want to focus on
other Spiritual practices that recalibrate the Major Chakras. By healing the
Chakras at a deep level, you optimise their energy flow, maximising how
much Light energy the Aura can hold. The more Light is present, the higher
one's vibration of consciousness is, improving the mind, body, and Soul
quality and furthering one's Spiritual Evolution.
The four healing modalities that I will focus on in this section are
Gemstones (Crystals), Tuning Forks, Aromatherapy, and Tattvas. These are

the healing modalities I found most attractive to work with and learn about
on my Spiritual journey and the ones that had the most significant impact on
me. Other healing methods include but are not limited to Reiki,
Acupuncture, Qigong, Tai Chi, Reflexology, Biofeedback, Ruach Healing,
Past Life Regression, Hypnosis, Transcendental Meditation, and NeuroLinguistic Programming.

Figure 63: Spiritual Evolution

GEMSTONES (CRYSTALS)
Formed within the heart of the Earth over Aeons of time, Gemstones
(Crystals) embody intense concentrations of energy. Their therapeutic use
dates to approximately 5000 years ago; old Chinese texts on traditional
medicine mention Gemstones, as do Ayurvedic texts from India. We find
evidence of the use of Gemstones going back to before history was written—
even The Holy Bible has over 200 references to Gemstones and their healing
and protective properties.
Many Ancient civilizations and traditions, including the Olmecs from
Mesoamerica and the Egyptians, used Gemstones in their sacred sites, where
we found evidence of energy generation and manipulation. The practice of
using Gemstones to heal the mind, body, and Soul and protect the Aura from
negative energy influences continues today since they are still being used as
a form of alternative healing by Spiritual practitioners alike.
A Gemstone is a precious or semi-precious stone produced by nature,
found in rock formations. They are the Earth’s DNA—containing records of
the development of the Earth over millions of years. Most Gemstones are
mineral Crystals—semi-precious stones that occur more widely in nature
than precious stones. To clarify, precious stones (Ruby, Sapphire, Diamond,
and Emerald) are considered Gemstones but not Crystals, whereas all
Crystals in existence can be referred to as Gemstones. Also, there are certain
occasionally organic materials that are not minerals (Amber, Jet, Coral, and
Pearl) but are deemed Gemstones also. Because of their rarity, colour, and
composition, precious stones are much more expensive on the market than
semi-precious stones.
"Crystal Healing" is the term used in the Spiritual community for the
therapeutic use of Crystals—the semi-precious Gemstones. Many Crystals
have their molecules arranged in such a way so that they create a geometric
pattern in some way, making them great energy generators and conductors
for use in healing sessions. One healing session can have positive effects that
last for days, including heightened awareness, inner peace and calm,
increased intuition, empathy, intellectual capabilities, and a sense of love and
acceptance for oneself and others.

Gemstones are generally easy to use, which makes them quite attractive
to beginners in the field of Spiritual healing. However, one needs a correct
understanding of the correspondences of each stone to get the most out of
them since many Gemstones relate to multiple Chakras. For this reason, it is
not uncommon to see authors on this subject presenting inconsistent
relations between the Gemstones and the Chakras.
As mentioned, there are hundreds of Gemstones in existence, and each
one has its unique vibration and specific energetic properties determined by
its colour and other factors. By learning about the varieties of Gemstones
and their application, you can harness their full healing potential. Gemstone
energy medicine uses the body's inherent healing force to nourish and heal
the energies in the Aura. When placed on the body, the Crystal's vibration
induces the Lower Astral Body (Etheric Body) sheath—the lowest and most
dense Subtle Body after the Physical Body and one that links us with the
higher Subtle Bodies of the Elements of Water, Fire, Air, and Spirit.
The Physical Body and the Lower Astral Body relate to the Earth
Element—the contact point for Crystal energies to enter into our Aura.
Quarried from deep within our Planet, all Crystals have an Earthy
component, even if their properties relate to other Elements. For this reason,
Crystal work is very effective in treating ailments associated with the
physical body. However, although we can use Crystals and other stones to
cure mental issues, emotional disorders, or acute illnesses, their ultimate
purpose is to help us reach our highest potential as Spiritual human beings.
As our Chakras vibrate at a specific frequency, it makes us naturally
receptive to the vibrations of Gemstones since we can align our vibrations
with theirs. Gemstones have the most potent vibratory effect when placed
directly on the body in areas that correspond with the Major Chakras. The
energy emitted by the Gemstone directly affects the Chakra, thereby
removing any blockages or stagnations within it. Thus, the Chakras regain
their optimal functioning, which, in turn, facilitates the free flow of energy
in the Nadis. In essence, this is how the practice of Crystal Healing works.
Gemstone use does not begin and end with Spiritual Healing, though.
We can also incorporate Gemstones to enhance the power of other energy
healing modalities and even help us manifest a desire or goal. For example,
if you want an energy boost while meditating, simply hold a Gemstone in
your hand with corresponding properties you are trying to induce into your
Aura. Or, if you desire to attract romantic love or want a new job or career,

you can devise a ritual where you infuse your intention into a Gemstone with
properties that can attract those things to you. In fact, since they relate to the
Earth Element, Crystals are powerful tools to aid in manifestation.
Gemstones are essentially like batteries with different properties that
we can use in various ways. Another example of their use is to add
protection to a room or to infuse positive energy into it, making it a sacred
space. To raise the vibration of an area, place Gemstones with specific
properties in certain parts of the room, especially the corners or in front of a
window where Light comes in. However, be careful with Clear Quartz in
front of a window since it focuses the Sun’s rays and may start a fire.
Placing various Gemstones around a space creates a grid-like energy
pattern that connects them, beaming energy back and forth to provide the
desired effects and influence anyone that comes into this space. This use of
Gemstones has existed since time immemorial which is why we find them
strategically placed in many Ancient sites from various cultures and
traditions.
Although Gemstones have many uses, in this section, we will focus
primarily on Chakric Healing and using Crystals to aid in the Spiritual
Evolution process. Remember that by healing one's energy at a deep level,
their mental, emotional and physical state improves and their ability to
manifest the life they desire.

Crystal Formations and Shapes
Crystals can be found in many shapes and forms with many natural
formations such as Geodes, Clusters, Freeform Crystals, and others that
humans quarried and cut into specific shapes (Figure 64). Geodes are
rounded rock formations that expose a beautiful crystalline interior once they
are broken in half. Clusters, however, are groups of Crystals extracted from
Geodes. Each Cluster is special and unique, making no two Clusters the
same.
Both Geodes and Clusters have powerful vibrational energies since they
contain many Crystal points combined. Unlike Clusters, though, Geodes
have all of their terminations located on the inside. Both varieties also come
in different shapes and sizes and are often used in decoration because of
their visual appeal. Clusters are more often used during healing sessions to
amplify and focus their natural energies.

Freeform Crystals, or "Rough" Crystals, as they are called, are
irregularly shaped, unpolished chunks of semi-precious stone. They have
been cut and carved instead of polished to show off the natural beauty of the
individual Crystal. The smaller cut Freeform Crystals can be used in healing
sessions. In contrast, the larger ones are more often used to add positive,
protective energy to a space or simply as decorative elements.
Tumbled stones are the standard cut and polished shape of Crystal on
the market, with forms that vary in size and shape. Generally, they are on the
smaller side, though, up to one inch in diameter, making them useful for
Crystal Healing since they can be placed directly on the body to generate
and manipulate energy.
Next, we have Crystals that are carved and polished into different
geometric and symbolic shapes. This custom has existed for thousands of
years within various Ancient traditions and cultures. Since all geometric
shapes direct energy in different ways, by carving a Crystal into a shape, we
change its energy output and enhance specific properties, allowing us to
work with the stone in more ways. Some of the more widely produced
Crystal shapes are the Crystal Points, Wands, Hearts, Spheres, Eggs,
Pyramids, and Shards. Other less commonly made Crystal Shapes include
Rods and Slabs, to name a few.
Crystal Points (Towers) are generally larger stones that terminate at a
point, generating more directed energy. They are often six or eight-sided and
shaped like Crystal Wands but bigger. Crystal Points occur naturally in many
Cluster types, including Amethyst, Clear Quartz, and Citrine. They are
usually cut at the base to stand upright and sought after by energy healers
since they carry more natural energy. Larger pieces of Rough Crystals can
also be cut to a point to direct energy. These are less expensive than Towers,
making them more desirable to energy healers.

Figure 64: Crystal Shapes and Formations
Crystal Wands come in a variety of shapes, sizes, and types. Like
Crystal Points, Wands are cut to a point to help amplify and direct the energy
of a Crystal. Some Wands are double terminated with a point at each end of
the Crystal. In contrast, Massage Wands are fully rounded and smooth at
each end. Crystal Wands are typically used to heal different parts of the
Aura. We can also use them to optimize the spin of a Chakra, as will be
given in a Chakra Healing technique at the end of this chapter.
Crystal Hearts are heart-shaped stones that come in various sizes.
Generally, they have properties that relate to the Heart Chakra, such as the
Rose Quartz, Malachite, and Green Aventurine. They emit energy in a loving
and gentle manner, giving us a sense of peace and harmony. Crystal Hearts
symbolically remind us to balance and centre ourselves by tuning into
Anahata Chakra and allowing our Soul to guide us in life. When used in a
healing session, the Crystal Heart become the central focus since it serves to
infuse the Spirit into the lower Elements, bringing about a complete
transformation of mind, body, and Soul.
A Crystal Sphere is a Three-Dimensional object with every point on its
surface being the same distance from the centre. Spheres are reflective,
emanating energy outwards in equal directions, making them perfect tools
for scrying, otherwise called "Crystal Gazing." The purpose of scrying is to
receive Divine downloads or visions of things that will happen in the future
or to obtain information concerning something happening right now that we
are unaware of consciously.
Crystal Eggs are similar to Crystal Spheres since they emit energy from
all sides but with a focal point at the top. Crystal Eggs contain a symbolic
component that relates to personal transformation and renewal. They help
tune us into our feminine energy, our receptive, passive side of Being
connected to the Water Element. Crystal Eggs are known for tuning us into
our subconscious mind, where the Spiritual transfiguration first begins to
take place.
Crystal Pyramids are Three-Dimensional figures with a flat base and
four sides that meet at a point. They draw energy from the Earth and project
it upwards through the termination point. They can be made of an individual
Crystal type or a combination of different Crystals, such as in Orgonite

Pyramids that are often used to absorb and shield from electromagnetic
radiation.
Crystal Shards are stick-like smaller pieces of rough Crystal, most
frequently used to add energy to other stones during healing sessions. The
three most common types of Crystal Shards are Clear Quartz, Amethyst, and
Rose Quartz. Crystal Rods (Sticks) are unpolished and raw pieces of Crystal
cut into a staff-like shape that vary in size. Since Selenite is quite brittle and
hard to shape by machines, it is usually sold in this form. And finally,
Crystal Slabs are cut and polished slices of Crystal with rough sides that
preserve the natural look of the stone. The larger sizes are generally used in
decoration, while we can use the smaller ones (up to 2" diameter) for healing
purposes.

Twenty-Four Significant Gemstone Types

Amber
This stone is created by fossilized resin from ancient trees; it comes in
various yellow, gold, and brown shades. Amber has properties of the Fire
Element, making it a powerful healer and cleanser of the body, mind, and
Spirit. It renews the nervous system while balancing our inner energies. It
also absorbs negative energy while grounding and connecting us to Ancient
wisdom. Amber is associated with Manipura Chakra and the Sun Planet. It
relates to the Taurus and Leo Zodiac Signs. Amber helps us overcome
depression while stimulating the intellect and promoting self-confidence,
altruism, self-trust, decision-making, and inner peace. This stone also gives
us the courage to establish healthy boundaries in our relationships while
protecting us from people who drain our energy.

Amethyst
A transparent purple stone that enhances Spiritual awareness by
unlocking a higher level of consciousness. Vibrating at a high frequency,
Amethyst has Spirit Element properties that create a ring of protection
around one’s Aura, blocking lower frequencies and energies. Amethyst also
aids in meditation while increasing one’s intuition, inner guidance, and
wisdom. It boosts our psychic abilities by stimulating the Third Eye and
Crown Chakras. In addition, Amethyst promotes emotional and mental
balance by clearing out negativity and confusion. It is known for warding off
nightmares and encouraging positive dreams. Amethyst is related to the
Aquarius and Pisces Astrological Signs with an affinity to Uranus and
Neptune Planets and the Air and Water Elements.

Aquamarine
This green-blue transparent to opaque stone has calming energies that
reduce stress while quieting the mind and bringing Spiritual awareness. It
connects us with the powers of Water and Air since it is associated with the
Planet Jupiter while having an affinity to Uranus and Neptune. Aquamarine
is known for boosting brainpower and intellect. Relating directly to
Vishuddhi Chakra, this stone improves our communication abilities while
giving us the courage to express our inner truth. It soothes our fears and
increases our sensitivity to the energies in our environment. Aquamarine
sharpens our intuition while clearing creative blockages. It helps us build
tolerance and responsibility while improving our problem-solving abilities.
This stone aligns the Chakras while shielding the Aura from negative
energies. It clears the consciousness of emotionally charged thoughts,
promoting harmony and balance, making it an excellent tool for meditation.
Aquamarine relates to the Gemini, Scorpio, and Pisces Zodiac Signs.

Black Obsidian
This dark black reflective stone comes from molten lava that has cooled
so quickly that it didn’t have the time to crystallize. Related to the Earth
Element, this stone has a grounding and calming effect on the mind and the
emotions, helping us stay centred and focused on the task at hand. Its black
colour draws the user inwards to the void of space, where our inner truth
lies. As such, this truth-enhancing stone has reflective qualities that expose
one’s blockages, weaknesses, and flaws. It acts as a mirror for the Soul that
gives us vitality to find our life’s purpose. The Black Obsidian’s energetic
properties keep negative thoughts at bay, promoting a positive outlook on
life. We can also use it to deflect the negative energies of others and remove
unwanted Spiritual influences. This stone relates to the Earth Star Chakra
and the Planet Earth, with an affinity to Pluto and the Fire Element. Its
energy is also characteristic of the Scorpio Zodiac Sign.

Bloodstone
This dark green to black stone with red blood-like spots helps remove
energy blockages from the Aura while boosting vitality, motivation, courage,
creativity, stamina, endurance, and overall energy. Associated with the
Planet Mars and the Fire Element, the Bloodstone purifies and cleanses the
lower three Elemental Chakras while equilibrating the Heart Chakra. It has
grounding properties, reducing stress, irritability, impatience, and
aggression, allowing us to live in the present moment. It also protects one
from harmful environmental energy, such as disruptive electromagnetic
frequencies. In addition, this stone is excellent for improving blood
circulation and balancing hormones, bringing coherence to the physical
body. Ancient soldiers used the Bloodstone to ward off evil and to invoke
the warrior's energy. The Bloodstone is associated with Aries and Pisces, the
two Zodiac Signs ruled by Mars. It has an affinity with the Earth Element.

Carnelian
This translucent orange to brownish-red stone stimulates creativity and
imagination, helping us give birth to new projects. Carnelian has a powerful
effect on emotions, so it is directly related to Swadhisthana Chakra. Known
as a stone of action and moving forward in life, Carnelian aids us in finding
solutions when experiencing emotional blockages. It has properties of the
Fire Element, motivating us to achieve success in business and other matters.
It also helps us in processing negative emotions such as anger, jealousy, fear,
sadness, confusion, loneliness while protecting us from other people’s
projected negative energies. Carnelian can also be used as a tool to get us
involved in creative expressions such as visual art, music, dance, or writing.
This stone is associated with Aries, Leo, and Virgo Zodiac Signs. In
addition, it has an affinity with Mars and the Sun.

Citrine
This transparent yellowish-orange stone brings vitality, confidence,
courage, happiness, and joy to one's life. Since it relates to Hara and the
Solar Plexus Chakras, Citrine is a very energizing stone, boosting one's
Pranic energy, creativity, motivation, and problem-solving skills. Citrine
works well for one's self-respect while promoting the expression of our inner
truth. It has properties relating to the Air and Fire Elements. Its golden light
rays draw out insecurities stemming from a negative mindset and replace
them with positivity. This stone also relates to the Gemini Astrological Sign
and the Planet Mercury. It has an affinity with the Sun, which is why we can
use it to energize all the Chakras.

Clear Quartz
This transparent stone carries the full spectrum of Light within it,
making it a master healer on all levels. Relating directly to the Spirit
Element, the Clear Quartz can be used for meditation, channelling,
dreamwork, energy healing while connecting us with our Higher Selves. Due
to its deep cleansing properties, the Clear Quartz clears any stagnant and
negative energy out of the Aura. It promotes positivity, mental and emotional
clarity, and focus. The Clear Quartz enhances one’s metaphysical abilities
and attunes us to our Spiritual purpose and True Will. Since its healing uses
are wide range, this stone works on all the Chakras. However, as it is very
high vibrational, the Clear Quartz works best on Sahasrara Chakra and the
Transpersonal Chakras above the head. Its energy also amplifies the positive
aspects of all the Astrological Signs. We can use clear Quartz to purify,
cleanse, and boost the energy of other Crystals. Since it is easily
programmable with intention and thoughts, it can also be used as a talisman
to attract whatever one desires.

Fluorite
This transparent stone is a mix of purple, blue, green, and transparent
colours. It is excellent for neutralizing negative energy, detoxing the mind,
and bringing harmony to mind, body, and Soul. Fluorite brings out one's
inner genius by stabilizing the Aura and heightening focus. Associated with
Ajna Chakra, this stone grounds and integrates Spiritual energies,
heightening psychic powers and intuition. Since it raises one's consciousness
to the Spiritual Plane, Fluorite is a good stone for meditation and deep sleep.
Its properties relate to the Air, Water, and Spirit Elements, invoked by its
colours: its green energy infuses the Air Element, purifying the heart, the
blue brings in the Water Element, calming the mind, while the purple colour
integrates the metaphysical properties of the Spirit Element. The clear,
transparent energy, the guiding force of the stone, realigns all the Chakras
and Elements into an integrated whole, enabling one to function mentally,
emotionally, and physically at their optimal capacity. Besides its profound
healing properties, Fluorite is one of the most stunning crystals on the
market, making it a popular stone in households.

Garnet
This transparent to translucent ruby-red stone boosts vitality, courage,
creativity, determination, change, and the ability to manifest your goals.
Associated with Mars and the Fire Element, Garnet cleanses all the Chakras
while re-energising them. It activates and strengthens the survival instinct
while invoking unconditional love, passion, and Spiritual devotion. It
grounds one’s chaotic energy, balancing the emotions and creating expanded
awareness of oneself and surroundings. It is the stone of Spiritual awakening
whose energy is known to stir the Kundalini into activity when used side-byside with Yogic practices designed to awaken this energy. Garnet also has
strong links with the Pituitary Gland as it promotes body regeneration while
boosting metabolism, the immune system, and one’s sex drive. This stone is
associated with Aries, Scorpio, and Capricorn Zodiac Signs.

Green Aventurine
This translucent green stone is known for manifesting prosperity and
wealth. It amplifies one’s intentions to create more abundance in life.
Associated with the Heart Chakra and the Planet Venus, Green Aventurine
brings harmony to all aspects of Being. It balances one’s masculine and
feminine energy, promoting a feeling of well-being. It also reinforces
leadership qualities and decisiveness while fostering compassion and
empathy. Green Aventurine enhances creativity while enabling one to see
different alternatives and possibilities. It stabilizes the mind, soothing
emotions and calming irritation and anger. This stone protects one from
psychic vampires. Since it aids in manifestation, Green Aventurine has
powerful Earth Element properties.

Hematite
This metallic black to steel grey stone provides a grounding and
balancing energy that helps dissolve mental limitations. Hematite uses the
magnetic qualities of our Yin-Yang energies to balance the Nadis and bring
stability to the nervous system. It removes chaotic energies from the Aura
while repelling the negative thoughts from other people. It also gives us a
feeling of security while boosting self-esteem, courage, and willpower.
Hematite's calming vibrations make it the perfect stone for people suffering
from anxiety, stress, and nervousness. This stone is known to help overcome
compulsions and addictions. Its relaxing effect on the physical body
enhances our connection to Planet Earth. Hematite is related to Muladhara
Chakra and the Earth Element with an affinity to Mars and the Element of
Fire. Because it stimulates concentration, focus, and original thoughts,
Hematite has specific properties akin to the Aries and Aquarius Zodiac
Signs.

Kyanite
This deep blue stone instantly aligns all the Chakras and Subtle Bodies.
Associated with the Causal and Soul Star Chakras, Kyanite balances our
Yin-Yang energies while removing blockages and restoring Prana to the
body. Kyanite brings peace and serenity; it eliminates all confusion and
stress and improves communication and the intellect. Kyanite also balances
the Throat Chakra since it encourages self-expression while aligning us to
our inner truth. It awakens our psychic faculties, activating our innate ability
to communicate telepathically. Kyanite’s soothing blue colour opens us up to
the Spiritual and Divine Realms, allowing us to contact our Spirit guides,
whether through meditation or dreams. Its energy is Fifth-Dimensional while
having certain properties akin to the Air Element. Kyanite is a powerful
transmitter and amplifier of high-frequency energies that awakens us to our
True Self and purpose in life. This stone never requires energetic clearing
since it cannot retain negative vibrations.
Lapis Lazuli
This opaque deep dark blue stone with metallic gold flecks opens the
Third Eye, improving intuition, Spiritual insight, inner guidance, and
psychic abilities. Mediums often use Lapis Lazuli to contact higher Cosmic
Planes and enhance their channelling ability. This stone is suitable for
improving memory and is often used in dreamwork. Lapis Lazuli has Water
Element properties that have a calming effect on the nervous system,
improving concentration and focus. Its use is beneficial with studying and
learning since it enhances one’s ability to digest knowledge and understand
things deeply. One can also use it to overcome addictions and trauma since it
promotes emotional healing. As it harmonizes all aspects of the Self, Lapis
Lazuli helps one overcome stress and anxiety, facilitating inner peace and
promoting deep sleep. Lapis Lazuli is related to Ajna Chakra and the Planet
Jupiter.

Malachite
This opaque dark-green stone with light and dark green and blue-green
bands protects one against negative energies while releasing unhealthy
emotional patterns that prevent our Souls from further advancement.
Associated with the Heart Chakra and the Planet Venus, Malachite realigns
the mind with the heart, helping one grow Spiritually. It invokes love,
compassion, and kindness into our lives, healing past trauma while raising
our empathic abilities. Malachite teaches us to take responsibility for our
actions, thoughts, and feelings while encouraging risk-taking and change. It
is known to guard against radiation while clearing electromagnetic pollution.
Malachite has an Earthy, grounding component; it has an affiliation with the
Capricorn Zodiac Sign.

Moldavite
This olive green or dull green stone takes us beyond our limits and
boundaries to otherworldly dimensions. It is technically a Tektite, which is a
group of natural glasses formed by meteorite impacts. As such, Moldavite is
quite literally out of this world. Its energetic properties are Fifth
Dimensional; they relate to the higher Divine Planes of consciousness,
which we can contact through complete transcendence. Moldavite allows us
to communicate with our Higher Selves, Ascended Masters, and other highvibrational Beings. This stone is also reported to open us up to
Extraterrestrial contact through consciousness. Associated with the highest
Transpersonal Chakra, the Stellar Gateway, Moldavite’s metaphysical
properties enable us to transcend Time and Space. As such, it can be used to
obtain knowledge related to our past lives and to clear any unwanted
baggage that we carried into this incarnation. On a more temporal level,
Moldavite helps us uncover emotions that keep us stuck in unhappy
situations in life. It allows us to move forward towards finding out our Soul’s
purpose.

Moonstone
This milky-white stone with a luminescent glow is great for boosting
one’s feminine energy, enhancing intuition, psychic abilities, and balancing
our emotions. It is related to the two feminine Major Chakras, Swadhisthana
and Ajna, while directly connected to the Causal/Bindu Chakra. With Water
Element properties, the Moonstone keeps us in emotional balance, enabling
us to go with the flow of life without being too attached. It invokes passivity,
receptivity and reflection, allowing us to perceive the world around us
without judgement. The Moonstone is also known to improve negative belief
patterns while enhancing our empathic abilities. Its use promotes a higher
sense of consciousness and Spiritual growth. The Moonstone is related to the
Cancer Zodiac Sign and the Moon Planet; its energy is more potent when the
Moon is waxing (increasing) than waning (decreasing). When it is a full
Moon, the Moonstone is known for inducing Lucid Dreams. Ancient people
used the Moonstone to help with female reproductive system issues.

Red Jasper
This red stone is excellent for providing protection and stability to the
Aura while absorbing negative energy. It can neutralize radiation and other
forms of electromagnetic and environmental pollution as well. Its red-hot
vibration increases our energy levels, inspiring a positive attitude while
grounding all undesired energies. Red Jasper provides courage to be
assertive and mental endurance to complete any tasks. It has Fire Element
characteristics; Red Jasper is associated with Muladhara Chakra and the
Aries Zodiac Sign, with an affinity to Saturn. This stone sustains and
supports us through stressful times, bringing about emotional stability and
peace of mind. It stimulates our imagination, motivating us to put our ideas
into action. Since it fires up our energy system, the Red Jasper also
regenerates and rejuvenates our passions and sex drive.

Rose Quartz
A transparent to translucent pink coloured stone that balances the Heart
Chakra with its loving and peaceful energy. It invokes Divine Love, mercy,
compassion, tolerance, and kindness into the Aura. The stone’s pink colour
vibration activates a bridge between the upper three Spirit Chakras and the
lower three Elemental Chakras. Creating this bridge is crucial to
synthesizing the Spiritual Self with the human physical Self. With properties
of the Water Element, the Rose Quartz makes one receptive, teaching us to
love ourselves and others through trust, forgiveness, and acceptance. Its use
is beneficial during traumatic times since it soothes emotions at a deep level.
It is calming to the entire nervous system, reducing stress and anxiety. Rose
Quartz is the ideal stone to help one attract a romantic partner into their life
since it increases one’s level of unconditional love in the Heart Chakra. It is
related to the Libra and Taurus Astrological Signs and the Planet Venus. The
Rose Quartz can also be used as a sleep aid and heal any issues related to the
physical heart.

Selenite
This reflective, milky-white stone is a powerful tool to attune us to
Spiritual and Divine Planes of consciousness. Its use provides Ethereal
energy that connects us with our Body of Light which we can use to contact
high vibrational Beings such as Angels, Archangels, and Ascended Masters
in these Heavenly Realms. Associated with the Greek Goddess of the Moon,
Selene, this calming stone with Spirit Element properties heals us on all
levels: physical, emotional, and mental. Attributed to Sahasrara Chakra and
the Soul Star Chakra, one can use Selenite to connect with their Divine
purpose and anchor it to their lower consciousness. In addition, we can use
this stone to tune in with our innate wisdom and realign our consciousness
with love and Light. Selenite connects us with the Moon cycle and our
Guardian Angels and Spirit Guides.

Smoky Quartz
This translucent light to dark brown stone maintains one’s protective
energies while deflecting negative vibes. Smoky Quartz is known for
creating a protective circle around oneself during Spiritual ceremonies and
rituals. We can also use it for deflecting electromagnetic frequencies emitted
by electronics. With Earth and Air Element properties, the Smoky Quartz
grounds all mind chatter while raising concentration, making it a perfect
companion to meditation. This stone helps eliminate fear, nervousness, and
anxiety while giving us a feeling of security. It is known to amplify
masculine energy and survival instincts. The Smoky Quartz is often
recommended for treating depression and emotional stress since it drives out
darkness while bringing in positive energy. Smoky Quartz is associated with
the Earth Star Chakra and the Planet Saturn. It also relates to the Capricorn
Zodiac Sign.

Sodalite
This opaque dark blue with white and black streaks stone is excellent
for improving intuition, psychism, creative expression, and communication.
Related to Vishuddhi and Ajna Chakras, Sodalite raises one’s consciousness
to the Spiritual Plane, which brings the higher mind to the physical level. By
raising one’s Spiritual perception, Divination and meditative practices
become intensified. With properties related to the Air and Water Elements,
Sodalite is a good study aid as it removes mental confusion while raising
concentration, focus, and the ability to recall information. In addition, it
increases one’s reasoning abilities, objectivity, and discernment. Sodalite
also stabilizes the emotions, bringing inner peace, making it a good tool for
overcoming panic attacks. In addition, it enhances self-esteem, selfacceptance, and trust in oneself. It has an affinity to the Planet Jupiter and
the Sagittarius Zodiac Sign.
Tiger’s Eye
This opaque brown and gold stone with lighter bands of those two
colours combines Solar and Earth energies to invoke confidence, courage,
motivation, protection, and emotional balance. Tiger’s Eye supports
integrity, pride, security and aids us in accomplishing our goals and dreams.
It is associated with Swadhisthana Chakra while having an affinity with
Muladhara (Earth) and Manipura (Fire) Chakras and the Elements that rule
them. Since its energy is directly related to the Sun, Tiger’s Eye sparks the
imagination while keeping us grounded in our Spiritual and material
aspirations and pursuits. It connects us to our Souls, which empowers us and
opens us up to our fullest potential. Its use lightens up our outlook on life,
bringing mental clarity and positivity, even when faced with adversity.
Tiger’s Eye helps us master our emotions while releasing negative feelings
towards others, such as jealousy. It has an affinity with the Capricorn and
Leo Zodiac Signs.

Turquoise
This opaque bluish-green to greenish-blue stone is excellent for
communication since it aids in articulating inner feelings while removing
blocks to self-expression. It relates to Vishuddhi, the Throat Chakra, where
the masculine and feminine energies become balanced through the Spirit
Element. Turquoise is beneficial for connecting us with our inner truth while
shielding us from people’s negative emotions. With properties of the Air,
Water, and Fire Elements, Turquoise balances mood swings while boosting
inspiration that aids us mentally when experiencing creative blocks. In
addition, it helps with channelling higher wisdom and expressing it verbally
or through the written word. Turquoise is related to Jupiter and Mercury
Planets and the Gemini, Virgo, and Sagittarius Zodiac Signs. It has been a
prevalent stone used in jewellery throughout the ages because of its striking
colour and energy properties. Native Americans, especially, have been
wearing it for thousands of years to connect with Cosmic energies.

Cleansing Gemstones
Gemstones become programmed with energy over time. It is their
nature to do so, mainly if they have been handled by other people or even
yourself when you were in an unbalanced state of mind. Therefore, before
using Gemstones for healing purposes, it is crucial to "clear" them of any
residual energy. Clearing a Gemstone will return it to its optimal, neutral
state, which is essential, especially when doing a healing session on
someone new. But even if you are performing healing on yourself, it helps to
clear the Gemstones often as they are most potent when their energies are
reset.
I will discuss a few methods that I found work best to clear Gemstones.
Keep in mind that if you are familiar with how to clear the energy of Tarot
Cards as outlined in The Magus, you can utilize those same methods to clear
Gemstones as well. The Full Moon Cleanse is especially useful since the
rays of the Moon are very efficient to dispel old energies from Gemstones
and return them to their optimal vibration.
The quickest, most popular, and perhaps most efficient way to cleanse a
Gemstone is to place it in saltwater. Water by itself, especially from a natural
stream, works well to cleanse a Gemstone, but when you pour it in a glass
(not metal or plastic) and add sea salt, it makes for a more powerful cleanse.

Be sure to use sea salt only since table salt contains aluminium and other
chemicals.
Make sure that the Gemstone is wholly submerged in the water and
leave it in there for 24 hours so it has time to reset completely. A Gemstone
that requires a much deeper and thorough cleansing can be left in there for
up to one week. Afterwards, rinse your Gemstones in cool running water to
remove any remaining salt. It is recommended to dispose of the saltwater
after since it would have absorbed the negative unwanted energies.
Keep in mind that even though saltwater is the most optimal method of
cleansing a Gemstone, it can have a harmful effect on some Gemstones and
even change their appearance and properties. For example, porous stones
that contain metal or have water in them should not be left in saltwater.
Gemstones that should be kept away from salt include Opal, Lapis Lazuli,
Pyrite, and Hematite, to name a few.

Programming Gemstones
Other than being used for energy healing, Gemstones can also be
programmed with a specific intention to manifest a goal. Gemstones are
known throughout history to be used as tools to help connect conscious
thoughts with the body. Thoughts are powerful because they direct energy.
When one uses a programmed Gemstone, its frequency helps to magnify the
thoughts and intentions, thereby aiding the manifestation process.
Although many people use Gemstones to manifest material things for
them, such as a new girlfriend or a car, I have always believed that focusing
on your Spiritual transformation instead would be more propitious in the
long run. After all, attracting something to yourself that your Ego wants but
that does not further your Soul’s progression will stagnate your Spiritual
Evolution progress since you will have to discard that thing eventually to
move ahead. Therefore, if you focus on Enlightenment instead and
programme Gemstones to reach this goal, your material life will fall into
place in due time.
You can programme a Gemstone to focus its energy on something you
desire to achieve or alter within yourself, thereby magnifying your intent.
Thus, the Gemstone becomes a talisman, a self-generating energy device
(battery) that adds the necessary fuel to your willpower to achieve your goal.
Find a place where you can be on your own for this exercise. Before
beginning the process of programming a Gemstone, you must make your

intention or purpose clear in what you are trying to achieve through its help.
Construct a simple sentence with your desire ingrained within it, framed
from the affirmative viewpoint. If you want help with developing better
memory, for example, or increasing your creativity or inspiration, make your
intention clear in your sentence. Refer to Table 1 at the end of this chapter
for the correspondences between the Gemstones and human
expressions/powers.
You must then cleanse the Gemstone and remove any pre-programmed
energies from it. To do so, perform one of the cleansing techniques
previously mentioned. Afterwards, hold the Gemstone in your hand and
connect with it by going into a meditative state. Feel its energy pouring into
your Heart Chakra through your palms become one with it. Once you have
made a connection, you can begin to programme it.
Speak to the stone out loud as you would to a friend. Make it clear what
you need help with. If you feel its energy becomes negative concerning what
you are asking of it, you will need to find another stone. The connection
between you and the stone must be positive for this to work.
Now begin to repeat your sentence, which you will use like a Mantra.
Your sentence is Magickal since you will use it to manifest the reality you
desire. Keep repeating the Mantra for a few minutes and feel the stone heat
up in your hand while charging it. Once you feel you have charged the stone
sufficiently with your willpower, end the exercise.
You now have a potent device that will help you achieve whatever it is
you need help with. Store the stone in white linen and carry it with you until
what you asked of it manifests. If you feel you need to reprogram the stone
or add more charge to it, you can always hold it in your hand, make a
connection, and repeat your Mantra to programme it further.

Chakra Healing with Gemstones
The following Crystal Healing technique can be done on yourself or on
other people. When doing it on yourself, create a space in which you can
relax and meditate without being disturbed. If you want to burn some
incense to get you in the right mind-state, then do so. You will need to be
lying down comfortably for this exercise, so use a pillow if you wish. You
should be in a relaxed and meditative state of mind, practising mindfulness.
Breath control is one of the essential components for entering a
meditative state of mind, which is a prerequisite when working with all

Spiritual Healing modalities. For optimal results, use the Four-Fold Breath
(Sama Vritti) technique that you can find in the "Pranayama Exercises"
chapter in the Yoga section of this book. This breathing exercise will calm
down your inner energies and raise the vibration of your consciousness,
opening you up to receiving the healing. You can use it in isolation for a few
minutes before the healing session and during the healing session to keep
yourself balanced.
If you are performing Crystal Healing on someone else, you can include
a hands-on healing component to this exercise for optimal results. However,
it would be helpful if you determined which Chakras require extra attention
before starting the Chakra Healing exercise. This information can then also
be applied if you wish to add the use of Crystal Wands to optimise the spin
of Chakras.
Scan each Chakra using the palm of your non-dominant hand to intuit
whether it is functioning well or its energy feels stagnant. Well-functioning
Chakras have a ball of energy with steady heat emanating from them that
you can feel on your scanning hand as pressure intensifies the more
conscious contact you make with it. However, Chakras that are stagnant will
create very little to no pressure on your scanning hand.
Chakra Healing with Gemstones Method (with Optional Added
Elements)
To begin the exercise, place a corresponding Gemstone on each of the
Seven Major Chakra points (on the front of the body) while laying down.
(Use Table 1 to obtain this information.) For Sahasrara, place a Gemstone
above the head. For Muladhara, you can place a Gemstone on your genitals
or right below, in the area between your perineum and coccyx. If you are
working with the Transpersonal Chakras, place the Soul Star Crystal six
inches above the top of the head while placing the Hara Crystal directly on
top of the navel (Figure 65). The Earth Star Crystal should be placed six
inches below the feet. If you are doing this exercise by yourself and are
having a challenging time placing the Crystals on your body, you may get
assistance from another person.

Figure 65: Gemstone Placement on the Chakras
Once the Gemstones are placed, close your eyes and relax, quieting
your mind for 10-30 minutes. The longer you give this exercise, the more
healing energy you will obtain. It is essential to do at least 10 minutes for the
energy in the Gemstones to infuse the Chakras efficiently. This exercise has
a quantifiable effect, meaning that the longer you do it, the more healing you
will receive. For starters, best to start with less time and then add more time
as you repeat the exercise. Ideally, it would be best if you repeated this
exercise daily. Let your Higher Self guide you in this process.
During the healing session, practise becoming aware of any of your
body’s responses to the healing treatment. Your attention may be drawn to
one or more of the Gemstones where they may feel hot or cold, heavy or
light. You may experience tingles, or electrical zaps, usually in the areas
where the Gemstone is placed but even in other areas of the body. Simply
notice them and let go. Do not dwell on what you are experiencing. This
exercise should make you feel calm and relaxed but also grounded.
Gemstone energy will stimulate your thoughts and emotions. Regardless,
focus your attention on keeping your mind still.
Option#1-Crystal Shards

A powerful technique for amplifying the healing in a specific Chakra
(or Chakras) is to add four, eight, or twelve Clear Quartz Crystal Shards
around a Chakra Gemstone to intensify its healing properties. The more
Quartz Crystal Shards you add, the greater the effect will be. You can use
this part of the exercise on yourself or other people. Each Quartz Crystal
Shard should be pointing towards the central Gemstone, which will focus the
energy into the chosen Chakra more efficiently, greatly amplifying and
intensifying the healing power.

Figure 66: Amplifying a Crystal with Clear Quartz Shards
For example, you can boost the power of the Crystal placed on the
Heart Chakra, such as a Rose Quartz or Malachite, since this is the Chakra of

the Air Element that harmonizes the lower three Chakras of Fire, Water, and
Earth while infusing the Spirit Element. Using a Heart Crystal for this
purpose can be beneficial, especially a larger one that becomes the focus of
the Crystal Healing session. It can also be beneficial to amplify the power of
a Hara Chakra Crystal (Figure 66), like a Citrine or a Sunstone. Doing so
will increase the quantity of Prana in your body, which can be used for
various purposes like powering the mind or healing the body.
Option#2-Hands-on Healing
If you are performing Crystal Healing on someone else, you can use the
time while they are lying down in silence to practise hands-on healing on
their Chakras (Figure 67). Using your Palm Chakras, you can intentionally
send healing energy into any Chakra that needs work or on all the Chakras
by spending a few minutes on each if you aim to balance them.
When doing hands-on healing, it is necessary to generate Pranic energy
in the chest, which requires you to bring attention to its centre and breathe
from the lungs. Channel this energy now through your hands by imagining
healing energy beaming out of your Palm Chakras and infusing the targeted
Chakra. You should feel the heat coming from your hands and occasional
zaps on your palm’s surface if you are doing it right.

Figure 67: Sending Healing Energy through the Palms

Option#3-Crystal Wands
A powerful method of optimizing the spin of Chakras is to use Crystal
Wands. This technique can be used on yourself or other people. If you are
doing a Crystal Healing session on someone else, you can incorporate this
technique on Chakras that need extra attention. It helps if you have already
scanned each of the Chakras before starting the exercise. Since you will need
to move the Crystal Wand circularly to optimize the spin of a Chakra, you
will also need to determine whether the Chakra you want to work on spins in
a clockwise or counterclockwise direction. (Use the diagram in Figure 61 to
obtain this information.)
Place the Crystal Wand in front of the Crystal that sits atop the body
over the targeted Chakra. Ensure that the Crystal Wand’s properties
correspond with the Chakra or use one that can be used on all the Chakras,
like a Clear Quartz Wand. Now, begin to move it either clockwise or
counterclockwise. When working closer to the body, your circles should be
smaller in diameter than if you are working further away since every Chakra
projects outward in a cone-like fashion. You can also pull outwards in a
spiral-like manner, tracing the outside of the projecting Chakra.
By making contact with the Chakra’s flowerhead, you create a vortex of
energy in the Aura whose movement optimizes the spin of that particular
Chakra. For best results, spend five to ten minutes on each Chakra that needs
work. Unless you are performing this technique on yourself, you can work
on two Chakras at a time (Figure 68).

Figure 68: Optimising the Spin of Chakras with Crystal Wands
Once the Crystal Healing exercise is complete, remove the Gemstones
from your body. Your Chakras will be infused with new energy, which you
may feel strongly for the rest of the day. Any excess energy will dissipate
during sleep while your Chakras retain some of the energy into the next day
or two. Your consciousness may notice a shift in your energy immediately
depending on how sensitive you are psychically. Considering you are tuning
the Seven Major Chakras in this exercise, you will become balanced in
mind, body, and Soul. This effect is only temporary, though, which is why I
advise you to perform this exercise often.

TUNING FORKS
For thousands of years, all cultures and traditions spoke of a Universal Energy
Field that connects everything in existence. The Kybalion refers to it as "The All" and
further adds that everything within this all-encompassing Field is in constant vibration
and motion. The Holy Bible refers to the vibration of the Universe as "the Word," while
in Hinduism, it is sounded as the sacred Mantra "Om."
Within our Solar System and beyond, everything is essentially made up of Light
and sound. Pythagoras taught that all the Planets create a melody of sound in their
rotational movement, a vibration he referred to as the "Music of the Spheres." While
Light is made up of electromagnetic waves, sound is made of mechanical waves. A
mechanical wave is a vibration in Matter that transfers energy via a material like a
Tuning Fork, which emanates perfect sine-wave sound patterns.
The Tuning Fork was invented in the early 1700s but was used in its early stages
to tune musical instruments. However, it wasn’t until the 1960s that the science of
Tuning Forks became applied to the human body and its energies. As such, Tuning
Forks became a powerful modality used in Sound Healing.
Sound therapy is based on the sympathetic resonance principle—one vibrating
object sends out impulses through the air, thereby causing other objects in its vicinity to
vibrate in harmony with it. Tuning Forks are mainly used on or around the body,
sending waves of sound into targeted areas. For Chakric healing, the focus is the front
of the body where the Chakric energy centres are found, or the back along the spine,
again targeting the Chakric points. The Chakric energy centres happen to be where the
nerve centres are found along the spine that send impulses to different body organs. For
this reason, by energizing the Chakric centres, we are also stimulating the organs and
optimizing their health.
Our sense of hearing that detects sound is associated with the Element of Spirit or
Aethyr. For this reason, the use of Tuning Forks in Sound Healing has an immediate
impact on our consciousness, as opposed to the use of other healing modalities
mentioned in this section which require a more extended application period to feel their
energetic effects.
The length of time a healing modality requires to impact the consciousness
depends on which of the five senses it filters through and the Cosmic Plane level of its
corresponding Element. Crystals, for example, since they are associated with the Earth
Element, require a longer period of use during one healing session to impact the
consciousness than Aromatherapy, which is related to the Water and Air Elements that
are higher on the scale. Conversely, the use of Tattvas has an even more immediate
impact on the consciousness than Crystals and Aromatherapy since it is associated with
the Fire and Air Elements.

There are many Tuning Forks and sets on the market used for Spiritual healing.
Each Tuning Fork is calibrated to emit a particular sound frequency that relates to our
physical, mental, emotional, and Spiritual well-being. Some of the more widely used
Tuning Fork sets include the Sacred Solfeggio, DNA activation, Tree of Life Sephiroth,
and Planetary energies. In all cases, Tuning Fork sets are calibrated to match the
particular energies they are meant to produce. Using these specific sounds changes our
internal vibration, enabling deep cellular healing to occur.

Tuning Fork Types and Use
There are weighted and unweighted versions of all Tuning Fork Sets. Weighted
Tuning Forks have a round weight at the end of each prong. The heavier the Tuning
Fork, the stronger or heavier its vibration is. Weighted Tuning Forks have a more
robust vibration and can be used around the body and directly on it with the end of the
fork, the stem, sitting upright. Unweighted Tuning Forks do not provide the same
frequency as the weighted ones and are best used around the body and ears.
The Tuning Fork sets we will concern ourselves with in this book relate directly to
Major and Transpersonal Chakras. The process of Chakric healing with Tuning Forks is
simple. All one has to do is strike a Tuning Fork and place it on its corresponding area.
Then, by listening to the Tuning Fork’s vibration until it dies away, the related Chakra
becomes entrained with its sound, thereby returning to its optimal, healthy state.
Since Tuning Forks are a form of Sound Healing, it is imperative to hear their
vibration undisturbed, especially if you are using unweighted Forks. But I have found
that even if you wear earplugs when you are in the vicinity of vibrating Tuning Forks,
the soundwave induces the Aura and causes an inner change. Its intensity, however, is
less than it would be if you were listening to the vibration as well.
In my experience, there is no other method as powerful and efficient to balance
the Chakras as working with Tuning Forks. And this is because Sound Healing directly
impacts the Spiritual Plane, which affects the Planes below it. Ceremonial Magick
ritual exercises from The Magus are the most efficient practice of isolating each Chakra
and working on it. At the same time, Tuning Forks are most optimal for balancing all
the Chakras at once.
Chakra Tuning Forks also provide a renewed vitality and sense of well-being
while calming and relaxing the nervous system. Balancing the Chakras silences the Ego
since impulses from lower parts of the Self are neutralized. With balanced Chakras,
peace of mind is obtained. In turn, this balanced state of mind enables the
consciousness to connect with the Higher Self, bringing inspiration, creativity, and
purposeful living into one’s life.
Connecting with the Higher Self enables one to live in the moment, improving
cognitive abilities and raising awareness of one’s environment. Living in the Now is a
rapturous process that allows us to tap into our highest potential as Spiritual human
beings.

Chakra Tuning Fork Sets
There are two sets of Tuning Forks for the Chakras on the market, which I will
discuss. Both sets work to balance and tune the Major Chakras, although the effects
produced are slightly different. The first is the Seven Chakra Set (Figure 69), which
often includes the Soul Star and Earth Star Forks. This Tuning Forks set is designed to
contact the higher Cosmic Planes, including one's inner Spiritual energy. Through the
Hermetic Principle of Correspondence (As Above, So Below), the lower Planes will be
affected, including emotions and thoughts. The Seven Chakra Tuning Fork Set is based
on the rotation of the Planets around the Sun.

Figure 69: Seven Chakras Tuning Fork Set with Soul Star (Weighted)
The Seven Chakra Set uses precise mathematical formulas of our Solar System's
Planetary cycles, connecting to our Cosmic Multi-Dimensional Selves. It essentially
allows us to connect to our Higher Self and utilize its powers. Working with these
Tuning Forks balances the Chakras and neutralizes the Ego. The immediate result is an
inspired state of mind and clarity of thought. Being able to tune the Soul Star and Earth
Star Transpersonal Chakras allows one to ground the entire Chakric system, which
aligns the consciousness with the Higher Will. It enables one to be in harmony with the
Planet Earth.
The second set of Chakra Tuning Forks is called the Harmonic Spectrum Set
(Figure 70). This is a complete octave of eight Tuning Forks (C,D,E,F,G,A,B,C)
derived from Pythagorean mathematics, which is essentially the ascending musical
scale. In comparison to the Seven Chakra Set, the Harmonic Spectrum Set works more
at a physical level, directly affecting cognitive function. Since the Physical Plane is

denser and lower in vibration than the Spiritual Plane, the physical body is affected
first, which then affects the inner Cosmic Planes through the Principle of
Correspondence.
The Harmonic Spectrum Set is more centred around the five human senses; the
tissues, fluids, organs, bones, etc., of the physical body, are affected. They are the
traditional Chakra frequencies from the Hindu tradition with two C notes
corresponding with the Root Chakra, D the Sacral Chakra, E the Solar Plexus, F the
Heart Chakra, G the Throat Chakra, A Ajna Chakra, and B the Crown.

Figure 70: Harmonic Spectrum Tuning Fork Set (Unweighted)

Tuning Fork Chakra Healing
You can perform Tuning Fork Healing on yourself if you wish to target the
Chakric points on the front of the body (Figure 72). For the Chakric points along the
spine, you will need help from another person. Keep in mind that the person helping
you will also be receiving the healing since Tuning Forks work through soundwaves—
all one has to do is listen to the sound a Tuning Fork makes or be in the same vicinity,
and the vibration will induce their Aura.
If you are performing Tuning Fork Healing on yourself, you should be sitting in a
Lotus position comfortably or on a chair. Ensure that you have some privacy when
performing Tuning Fork Chakra Healing. As with all Spiritual practices and exercises,
relaxation, focus, and peace of mind are of primary importance. As such, you should

start every session by performing the Four-Fold Breath for a few minutes with your
eyes closed to calm down your interior and enter a meditative state of mind. Remember
to keep using this breathing technique during the healing session as well for optimal
results.
Tuning Fork healing is best done on an empty stomach since that is when the Ego
is least active, and the mind is most focused. Also, I teach my students never to work
with energy invoking or balancing exercises right before sleep since, in many
instances, it is challenging to induce sleep afterwards. In the case of Tuning Fork
Chakra Healing, you will find that your vitality and overall raw energy will heighten
after the exercise, which will make you unable to fall asleep for at least a few hours. It
is best to perform this practice right in the morning before a meal and set the tone for
the day by being energetically balanced.
Tuning Fork Chakra Healing-Basic Method
Begin the exercise at the lowest Chakra, the Earth Star, if you have its
corresponding Tuning Fork. If not, start with the Root Chakra, Muladhara, and strike
its Tuning Fork with the rubber mallet that came with the set. If you did not receive a
rubber mallet, you could use a hockey puck instead. Many practitioners prefer using the
hockey puck since it is more versatile.
You will employ two techniques on each Chakra in this Basic Healing method.
The first technique involves using the vibrating part of the Tuning Fork, the prong, in
unweighted Forks and the round weight in the weighted ones and placing it about half
an inch away from the body over the Chakra. Another method you can use only with
weighted Tuning Forks is to stand it on its stem (end part) and place it upright directly
on the Chakra so that the vibration induces the body. (Make sure not to touch the
prongs of the Tuning Fork so as not to disturb its vibration.)
The Tuning Fork should be held in position and listened to for twenty seconds.
You will need to strike the Fork two, maybe three times, since the sound dies away
after ten seconds or so. Figure 71 shows the positioning of the Tuning Forks in Chakric
healing, whether weighted or unweighted.
The Earth Star Tuning Fork is to be placed six inches below the feet or at the feet
if you are standing, while the Soul Star should be placed six inches above the top,
centre of the head. For the Root Chakra, you should place its Tuning Fork on or
directly below the perineum, while for the Crown Chakra, place it on or directly above
the top centre of the head. The idea behind this first healing technique, whether you are
using the Tuning Fork on the body or an inch away from it, is to allow the vibrating
Fork to induce the Chakra and make it vibrate in resonance with it.

Figure 71: Placement of Tuning Forks in Chakric Healing
The second technique is similar to the Crystal Wands method of optimising a
Chakra’s spin. With this method, you will focus only on the Seven Major Chakras.
Depending on your Soul’s gender, determine the direction of movement of your Root
Chakra’s flowerhead. (Again, use Figure 61 in the previous chapter to find out which of
your Chakras are spinning clockwise and which are spinning counterclockwise.) Then,
use the Root Chakra Tuning Fork and gradually move it circularly in the same direction
as the corresponding Chakra’s spin. You can keep the Tuning Fork parallel to the body
as you do this or have it at a 45-degree angle. As you circle the Tuning Forks, move
them outwards in a pulling motion for the Chakras that project perpendicular to the
body. In contrast, for the Crown and Root Chakras that project parallel to the body,
circulate their corresponding Forks upwards and downwards in a spiral-like fashion. Be
mindful to always focus on the centre of where the Chakric energy is emanating from.
You are to use both healing techniques with the Tuning Forks and interchange
them, spending approximately two to three minutes working on each Chakra. Keep in
mind that this exercise has a cumulative effect. The longer you spend on each Chakra,
the more you will be tuning it. If you want to spend more than three minutes on each
Chakra, the choice is yours. Be mindful of being consistent with all the Chakras—if
you spend a certain amount of time on one Chakra, then spend an equal amount of time
on all the other ones since the purpose of this exercise is to tune the Chakras but also to
balance them.

Figure 72: Using Weighted Tuning Forks on Yourself
Next, pick up the Tuning Fork for the Sacral Chakra, Swadhisthana, and follow
the same procedure. Keep in mind that if your Root Chakra is spinning clockwise, your
Sacral Chakra rotates counterclockwise and vice versa. Therefore, once you get the
direction of spin of your Root Chakra, the Chakra above will spin in the opposite
direction, interchanging as you go upwards until you reach Sahasrara.
Be consistent with your technique variation while being clear-minded and focused
on the task at hand. Allow all outside thoughts to dissipate and leave your Aura without
you getting attached to them. The key is to keep the mind silent and only focus on the
energy within you as you are tuning your Chakras. Doing so will allow for the most
optimal healing to occur.
Next, pick up the Tuning Fork for the Solar Plexus Chakra, Manipura, and repeat
the same procedure with the two techniques mentioned above. Then, do the same for
the other Chakras. Note that if you are working with the Earth Star and Soul Star
Chakras, you are to start with the Earth Star and end with the Soul Star since they are
the two lowest and highest Chakras you are working with. Also, when working with
the Transpersonal Chakras, you are only to employ the first healing technique since

these Chakras emanate outwards from their centre instead of projecting horizontally or
vertically.
Once you are finished with the exercise, spend a few minutes meditating on your
energy and allowing the healing to permeate all levels of your consciousness. You will
find that Tuning Fork Chakra Healing will not only tune and balance the Chakras but
also connect you with your Higher Self. As a result, your inspiration and creativity will
heighten, as will neutrality in your emotional state. There is no more efficient way to
balance your Chakras than with the use of Tuning Forks.
Tuning Fork Chakra Healing-Advanced Method
A more advanced method of performing Tuning Fork Chakra Healing is to use
multiple Forks simultaneously (Figure 73). The idea behind this technique is to connect
two Chakras in sequence. This technique is best performed on the Major Chakras,
although you can also do it to join the Earth Star with Muladhara and the Soul Star with
Sahasrara.

Figure 73: Working with Two Tuning Forks at the Same Time
If you are working only on the Major Chakras, pick up the Root and Sacral
Chakra Tuning Forks in one hand and strike each one. While they are vibrating, place
one of the Tuning Forks in the other hand and position each one above their respective
Chakras. After about five seconds, take the Sacral Chakra Tuning Fork and move it
over to the Root Chakra in a brushing movement. Now move back up to the Sacral
Chakra area, again in a brushing motion. Repeat this process a few times with the

Sacral Chakra Tuning Fork, going up and down while holding the Root Chakra Tuning
Fork in place.
Next, take both Tuning Forks into one hand and strike each one with the rubber
mallet or hockey puck. Repeat the same process; only this time hold the Sacral Chakra
Tuning Fork in place while moving the Root Chakra Tuning Fork up and down in a
brushing movement. Repeat this procedure a few times, spending approximately three
to five minutes on each set of Chakras.
Now, put down the Root Chakra Tuning Fork and pick up the Solar Plexus one.
Repeat this same procedure for the Sacral and Solar Plexus Chakras, spending the
equal amount of time on this set of Chakras as you did the first set. Then, put down the
Sacral Chakra Tuning Fork and pick up the Heart Chakra one. Repeat the same process.
Do this for the remaining Chakras, making sure to be consistently working with each
pair. When you are finished, spend a few minutes in silence meditating on the invoked
energies before ending the exercise altogether.

Sacred Solfeggio Tuning Forks
Sacred Solfeggio frequencies date back hundreds of years. They are believed to
have originated with Gregorian Monks who chanted these frequencies in harmony
during religious masses to bring about a Spiritual awakening. These sound frequencies
make up a six-tone scale where each frequency attunes different parts of the Self on
physical, emotional and Spiritual levels.
As there are six original frequencies, three more missing notes have been added in
recent times to complete the entire scale. Together, the Sacred Solfeggio frequencies
heal and balance the whole Chakric System. Seven of the nine frequencies are
attributed to one of the Seven Major Chakras, while the other two Tuning Forks
correspond with the Earth Star and Soul Star Chakras (Figure 75).
When used in Sound Healing, the Sacred Solfeggio Tuning Forks are best applied
0.5-1 inch away from the ears, thereby making direct contact with the Etheric Plane,
the first Auric layer from the body related to the Earth Star and Muladhara Chakras.
The Earth Star also has a Transpersonal layer that is like an Etheric blueprint
containing the entire Chakric system while connecting with the energies of the three
highest Transpersonal Chakras. Thus, by targeting the lowest Auric layer, the Etheric
Plane, we can induce any of the layers higher than it contained within this Etheric
blueprint. Remember, the higher layers interpenetrate the lower ones—As Above, So
Below.
Each Auric layer of the Major Chakras is about 1 inch apart in width from the one
that comes before or after it (Figure 74). (This number varies depending on the school
of thought.) The four Auric layers of the Transpersonal Chakras are more
comprehensive than the seven Major Chakra ones. Each one is at least 3-4 inches wide,
maybe more.
Although the Causal/Bindu Chakra has its own Auric layer, placed between the
Earth Star’s Etheric blueprint and the Soul Star, it generally serves as our contact point

between the Spiritual and Divine Planes. Then we have the Stellar Gateway Auric layer
and other subtle fields overlapping it. However, in using the Sacred Solfeggio Tuning
Forks, we will only be working with the first seven Auric layers related to the Physical,
Astral, Mental, and Spiritual Planes, while using the Soul Star Fork to open our
consciousness to the high vibration of the Divine Plane.

Figure 74: Sacred Solfeggio Frequencies and the Layers of the Aura
When using the Sacred Solfeggio Tuning Forks (Figure 76), you begin with the
lowest frequency, 174Hz (Soul Star), followed by the 285Hz (Earth Star) frequency.
The low frequency of the Soul Star Tuning Fork doesn’t connect you with the Divine
Plane by raising the vibration of your consciousness to it. Instead, it tranquillizes your
consciousness so that you become open to the loving energy of the Fifth Dimension,
which projects downwards from the Soul Star. Then, the Earth Star Fork picks up this
high vibration and grounds and anchors it deep into the Aura. Afterwards, you
gradually begin to move outward through the seven Auric layers in sequence by
utilizing their corresponding frequencies related to the Seven Major Chakras. You are
to end the progression with the final frequency, 964Hz, related to Sahasrara Chakra.

Compared to the two sets I previously described, the Sacred Solfeggio Tuning
Forks have a significantly higher and more ethereal vibration. They open the mind to
the Divine Plane and allow its Light to pour into the consciousness. They give one a
glimpse of the Spiritual or religious experience of God. Below, I will describe each of
the nine Sacred Solfeggio frequencies and their attributes and powers.

Figure 75: Sacred Solfeggio Frequencies and the Chakras
174 Hz/Soul Star
As the lowest vibration in the Sacred Solfeggio scale, the 175 Hz vibration acts
like an energetic anaesthetic—any pain in the physical body or the Aura will be
diffused by it. Its low soothing vibration gives our organs a sense of security, safety,
and love, and returns them to their optimal state. It makes us feel comforted and
nurtured by heightening our connection with the Soul Star Chakra.

285 Hz/Earth Star
The 285 Hz frequency grounds the consciousness to Mother Earth as it has an
intimate relationship with the Earth Star Chakra. This particular frequency addresses
any holes in the Aura and imbalances in the Chakras. It helps repair damaged tissue by
sending messages to corresponding energy fields, telling them to restructure the tissue
and return it to its original form. 285 Hz is the frequency of choice for many energy
healers.
396 Hz/Muladhara
As it is related to Muladhara, the Root Chakra, 396 Hz frequency is used to realise
our goals in life. Its energy tunes us into the Earth Element, which the consciousness
uses to manifest our desires into reality. Since it grounds the emotions and thoughts, the
Earth Element also grounds our guilt, fear, and trauma. The 396 Hz is a liberating
frequency that creates a powerful magnetic field that clears any obstacles to realization.
417 Hz/Swadhisthana
This particular frequency relieves tension and stress and facilitates positive change
and creativity. It is associated with Swadhisthana, the Sacral Chakra, corresponding
with the Water Element. It has a cleansing effect on the emotions as it clears out
destructive influences from past events stored in the subconscious. 396 Hz restructures
DNA to function most optimally by clearing limiting beliefs that hold us back from
being the best version of ourselves. On a physical level, this frequency increases
physical mobility by alleviating tightness in the joints and muscles as we get an influx
of the Water Element’s energy. 395 Hz is a Soul-cleanser that begins the process of
attuning us to the Light.
528 Hz/Manipura
Since it is related to the Solar Plexus Chakra (Manipura) and the Fire Element, the
528 Hz frequency is concerned with transformation on all levels. By optimizing our
Life energy and vitality, this frequency brings about heightened awareness, clarity of
mind, inspiration and imagination. It gives us the raw energy for creative expressions
and makes us excited about life’s opportunities. The 528 Hz frequency has been linked
with DNA reparation and rewiring neural pathways in the brain. It opens our hearts
further to the power of the Light and brings on profound Spiritual experiences and
miracles in our lives. This frequency helps neutralize anxiety and physical pain while
facilitating weight loss.
639 Hz/Anahata
This frequency is related to Anahata, the Heart Chakra, and the Air Element. Best
known as the frequency of love and healing, 639 Hz helps us create harmonious
interpersonal relationships in our lives, whether with family, friends, or romantic
partners. The frequency inspires compassion, creating deep and profound connections

with others. It enhances tolerance, patience, understanding and communication. In
romantic relationships, the 639 Hz frequency will enable us to become vulnerable,
which improves intimacy. On a mental and emotional level, this frequency is very
healing as it allows us to tune into our Souls and away from the Ego and its inhibitions.
741 Hz/Vishuddhi
This frequency deals with empowerment and speaking one’s truth. Since it is
related to Vishuddhi, the Throat Chakra, the 741 Hz frequency improves
communication by facilitating clear thinking and speaking, which increases selfconfidence. In addition, this frequency brings about an influx of the Spirit Element
which allows us to tune into our intuition and our Higher Self. Doing so leads to a
simpler and healthier life filled with new opportunities. On a physical level, the 741 Hz
frequency brings about a change in diet towards foods with harmful toxins. Also, this
frequency has been known to clear out any bacterial, viral, and fungal infections in the
body.
852 Hz/Ajna
As it is related to Ajna Chakra, the Mind’s Eye, this frequency has to do with
inner sight, intuition, deep dreams (often Lucid ones), awareness, and cutting through
illusions. By bringing on an influx of the Spirit Element, the 852 Hz frequency allows
us to reconnect with Spiritual thinking and mystical experiences. It brings order to our
lives by establishing a link with the Higher Self so that it can communicate easily with
our consciousness. As such, the 852 Hz frequency gives us a deeper understanding of
the mysteries of Creation. It transforms the DNA and raises its vibration, thereby fully
attuning us to the Light and our Souls.
963 Hz/Sahasrara
This particular frequency corresponds with Sahasrara, the Crown Chakra, and it
deals with Oneness. It connects us to Cosmic Consciousness and the Fifth Dimension,
resulting in direct experiences of the Spiritual and Divine Planes. As the 852 Hz
frequency gave us an understanding of inner truths concerning our reality, the 963 Hz
frequency imparts on us Universal wisdom and knowledge. Through this frequency,
Ascended Masters can make contact with our consciousness and teach us through
Gnosis. It is also not uncommon for us to channel information received from higher
Planes. The 963 Hz frequency gives us the most substantial connection with our Higher
Self by bringing us closest to the Mind of the Creator.

Figure 76: Sacred Solfeggio Tuning Forks (Unweighted)
Sacred Solfeggio Tuning Forks Healing Method
The following exercise is to be used with the unweighted Sacred Solfeggio Tuning
Forks, although you can use any unweighted Tuning Forks set with a descending scale,
like the Harmonic Spectrum Set I described. The idea is to start with the lowest
frequency and move upwards in the scale until ending with the highest frequency. You
will find this healing method straightforward to complete since it only requires that you
listen to the vibrations of the Tuning Forks (Figure 77).
You can perform this exercise on yourself or someone else. The person accepting
the healing should either be sitting or lying down. Begin by calming down your inner
energies and entering a meditative state of mind. This healing method has two different
sequences that can be performed multiple times in the day, although not
simultaneously.
In the first sequence, you are to listen to each Sacred Solfeggio frequency one at a
time, from the lowest (174Hz) to the highest (963Hz). Place the vibrating Tuning Fork
by the left ear first (0.5-1 inch away) and listen to its sound undisturbed for twenty
seconds. You will need to strike the Fork at least two times since the sound dies off
after ten seconds. Then, place the vibrating Tuning Fork beside the right ear and listen
for twenty seconds before moving on to the next Tuning Fork in sequence. Work

through the ascending scale by repeating the same process until finishing with the
963Hz frequency, thereby completing the scale.
In the second sequence, you listen to two Tuning Forks simultaneously, one by
each ear, following their order in the scale. Begin with the 174Hz and the 285Hz,
placing one by the left ear and the other by the right. Then, switch ears. Next, pick up
the 285Hz and 396Hz and repeat the process. And so on, until you have finished with
the 963Hz and 174Hz frequencies, thereby completing the cycle. Spend a few minutes
in silence after each sequence, meditating on the energies you invoked before ending
the exercise altogether.

Figure 77: Placing Tuning Forks by the Ears

***
It is not uncommon for unresolved issues to come to the surface to be dealt with as
is the case with any energy healing. Remember, you are tuning your Chakras, which
means you must heal the Karmic energy they carry. This process can be unpleasant for
some and welcoming to others who are determined to get through it. Focus on facing
your issues instead of running away from them. Permanent and lasting healing only
happens when you have accepted something about yourself and are ready to make a
change.
It would be best if you become flexible in changing your beliefs about yourself
and the world you live in. Otherwise, every healing session will only be temporary for
you until you fall right back into your old programming. Your consciousness must align

with your Higher Self who is of the Light, if you desire to realize and live your true
Spiritual potential in this lifetime.
Table 1: The Twelve Chakras and their Correspondences
Chakra Name
(Sanskrit &

Location
and Colour

English)

Earth Star,
Super-Root

Tuning
Element,
Cosmic Plane

Expressions/

Fork Hz-

Powers

Cosmic/

Gemstones

Musical
6 Inches

All

Energetic

Below Feet,

Elements,

Foundation, Past

Black,

Etheric

Lives, Nature

Brown,

Blueprint/Lower Awareness, Karmic

Magenta

Astral (Etheric) Records

Smoky

68.05, Quartz, Onyx,
Black Obsidian,
Magnetite
Hematite,

Muladhara,
Root or Base

Between
Perineum and
Coccyx, Red

Earth

Survival,

194.18, Black
Element, Lower Grounding, Security, 256.0 &
Tourmaline, Red
Astral (Etheric) Physicality,
Plane

512.0

Kundalini (Origin)

Jasper,
Snowflake
Obsidian

Water
Swadhisthana,
Sacral or Spleen

Lower

Element, Higher Energy,

Abdomen,

Astral

Orange

(Emotional)
Plane

Hara, Navel

Navel,
Amber

Emotions, Fear

All
Elements, Astral
Plane

Subconscious Mind,
Sexuality,

Carnelian,
210.42, Orange Calcite,
288.0

Septarian

Personality (Ego)
Astral Gateway,
Pranic Source,
Sustenance,

Tiger's Eye,

Fire Agate,
-

Citrine,
Sunstone

Regeneration
Willpower,
Creativity,

Manipura,
Solar Plexus

Solar

Fire

Vitality,

Plexus,

Element, Higher Motivation, Self-

Yellow

Mental Plane

Esteem, Conscious

Amber,
126.22,
320.0

Mind, Character

Yellow Citrine,
Golden Topaz,
Yellow Jasper
and Opal

(Soul)
Anahata,
Heart

Between

Air

Thoughts,

Breasts

Element, Lower Imagination,

(Centre),

Mental Plane

Green

Love,
Compassion,

136.10,
341.3

Green
Aventurine,
Green Jade,

Affection, Kindness,

Malachite, Rose

Healing, Harmony,

Quartz

Group Consciousness
Amazonite,
Aquamarine,
Vishuddhi,
Throat

Throat,
Blue

Spirit
Element,
Spiritual Plane

Communication,
Intelligence, SelfExpression, Truth,

Blue Lace
141.27, Agate, Blue
384.0

Discernement

Topaz,
Turquoise,
Sodalite,
Angelite
Lapis

Between
Spirit
the Eyebrows Element,
Mind's Eye, Third (Slightly
Spiritual Plane
Ajna, Brow,

Eye

Above),

Lazuli,

Clairvoyance,
Intuition, Psychic
Senses, Dreaming,

221.23,
426.7

Gnosis

Indigo

Sapphire,
Azurite,
Sodalite,
Fluorite,
Labradorite

Oneness, God
Top of
Sahasrara,
Crown

Head

Amethyst,

Self & Cosmic
Spirit

Consciousness

(Centre),

Element,

(Link),

Violet or

Spiritual Plane

Transcendence,

White

Diamond, Clear
172.06, Quartz,
480.0

Quartz, Selenite,

Understanding,

Azeztulite

Wisdom
Top &
Causal/Bindu

Back of Head Elements,
(2-3 Inches
Out), White
6 Inches

Soul Star

All

Above Top of
Head,
Golden-White

All
Elements,
Divine Plane

Stellar
Gateway

All

Top of Head, Elements,
Gold or
Rainbow

Angel Aura

Death, Life
-

Life Purpose, True

Divine Plane

Celestite,
Herderite

Solar Self,
Spiritual Awareness,

Quartz,
Kyanite,
Selenite,

272.2,- Kyanite,
Nirvana Quartz,

Will

Danburite
Galactic Self,

12
Inches Above

Moonstone,

Union, Ego

Continuity, Cosmic
Spiritual/Divine
Exploration, 4th
Plane
Dimension

Rutilated

Moldavite,

Cosmic
Consciousness &
God Self (Source),
Divinity, Eternity, 5th
Dimension

Stellar Beam
-

Calcite,
Azeztulite,
Selenite

AROMATHERAPY
Aromatherapy uses natural plant extracts to create essential oils,
incenses, sprays, and mists, which we can use Spiritually, therapeutically,
ritualistically, and for hygienic purposes. This practice has been around for
thousands of years in various Ancient cultures and traditions—written
records going back to about 6000 years ago mention the use of essential oils.
In Ancient Mesopotamia, the cradle of civilization, the Sumerian
people used essential oils in ceremonies and rituals. Immediately after them,
the Ancient Egyptians developed the first distillation machines to extract oils
from plants and used them in their embalming and mummification process.
The Egyptians were also the first to create perfumes from essential oils,
which we still do today in the cosmetics industry.
The vast array of essential oil fragrances not only have pleasant scents
but they give off specific vibrations with healing properties that impact our
consciousness when breathed in through the olfactory canal or applied
directly onto the skin. Ancient Chinese medicine was the first to use
essential oils holistically, while the Ancient Greeks used essential oils
topically to fight diseases and heal the body. Even the Ancient Romans used
essential oils for their fragrance as part of personal hygiene.
Aromatherapy is an excellent method of using the elements of the
natural world to heal the mind, body, and Soul. Its health benefits include
easing stress, anxiety, and physical pain, improving sleep, increasing vitality,
and boosting feelings of relaxation, peace, and happiness.
Essential oils are the most widely used plant extracts in Aromatherapy,
concentrated tinctures made from flower, herb, and tree parts, like bark,
roots, peels, and petals. The cells that give a plant its fragrance are
considered its "essence," which becomes an essential oil when extracted
from a plant. The three main extraction methods of extracting essential oils
from plant extracts are distillation, cold-pressing, and supercritical CO2
extraction.
On a subtle level, essential oils have a healing effect on the Aura and
the Seven Chakras. They can be used independently or combined with
Crystals, Tuning Forks, Mudras, Mantras, and other tools given in this
section for energy invocation/manipulation.

Using Essential Oils
Aromatherapy is vibrational healing based on metaphysical principles
and the physiological and physical benefits of the chemical components of
each fragrance. While Crystals impact our consciousness through physical
contact (touch) and Tuning Forks work through sound, essential oils work
through our sense of smell to affect our inner energies.
The three most popular methods of using essential oils are topical use,
diffusion, and inhalation. Topical use requires blending essential oils with
carrier lotions or oils and applying them directly onto the skin. Essential oils
have powerful chemical components with antiseptic, antibacterial, and
antiviral properties that have been used for centuries to prevent and treat
diseases when used directly on the skin.
Diffusion and inhalation require that you use your nose to breathe in the
essential oil's scent to obtain a healing effect. When using essential oils for
their subtle properties, you will need a lot less than topical application.
Generally speaking, the smaller the amount of oil that is being used, the
more potent its subtle effect.
In diffusion, you combine essential oil drops with cold water into a
diffuser machine (Figure 78), gradually releasing mist into the environment.
When diffused, the vast array of fragrances not only affect our mental and
emotional state, they also help remove unwanted odours from the
surrounding atmosphere and purify it of harmful contaminants.
The use of essential oils is generally safe, although some side effects
can occur, including eye, skin, and nose irritation. These are "concentrated"
extracts where it takes an enormous amount of plant matter to make just one
drop of essential oil, and every drop contains the condensed chemical
components of all the plants that went into it. Therefore, using too much
essential oil can cause adverse effects, just like using too much medicine.
In addition, some fragrances can cause mild allergic reactions in people
with sensitivities to plants. As such, inhalation is the most widely used
method by healing practitioners, which requires smelling the essential oil
directly from the bottle to obtain the desired effects. It gives one complete
control over how much of the fragrance they want to inhale, making it the
most low-risk method of applying essential oils during a healing session. For
example, if someone were to have an allergic reaction with a diffuser, they
might need to leave the space entirely, thus halting or even having to end the
healing session.

Essential oils can also be used to prepare an aromatic bath as part of a
ritual cleansing process. Use only six to eight drops of an essential oil in
ritual baths and combine with burning candles in corresponding colours to
the effect you are trying to produce. Keep in mind that intent is fundamental,
so choose your essential oil carefully and practise mindfulness while in the
bath. Ritual baths are an excellent way to cleanse your energies and should
be performed often, especially as a precursor to meditation, Ceremonial
Magick, Yoga, and other Spiritual Healing practices.
There are some precautions to be mindful of with the use of essential
oils. For one, essential oils should never be swallowed. Certain oils are
considered toxic when ingested, which can cause harm to the body and
organs. For this reason, make sure to keep all of your essential oils out of
reach from children. Secondly, pregnant women should avoid using essential
oils, especially during the first trimester. The same goes for children under
the age of six. And lastly, it is not recommended to use essential oils on
animals because they could have adverse reactions to the potency of some
fragrances and even die. For example, using essential oils on birds can prove
to be fatal in many instances.

Figure 78: Essential Oils and a Diffuser

How Essential Oils Work
Essential oil fragrances use the air around us as a transmission medium
to carry molecules into the nasal passage (Figure 79), thereby triggering an
emotional response. At the same time, the essential oil's particles are
delivered to the lungs with each breath where they enter the bloodstream,
directly impacting the nervous system and other organs. As such,
Aromatherapy is directly associated with the Air Element. However, since
our sense of smell is tied to our Limbic System, which regulates emotions,
behaviours, memories, and memory, Aromatherapy also has a relation to the
Water Element.

Figure 79: Aromatherapy and the Limbic System

There is a symbiotic relationship between the Water and Air Elements,
exhibited by nature's processes. For example, the water molecule (H2O)
contains one part oxygen. This close relationship is also found in our mental
processes since every time we experience a feeling (Water Element), a
thought (Air Element) precedes it.
In the Samkhya (also spelt Sankhya) school of Indian philosophy, the
sense of smell is associated with the Earth Element, which fits in this case
since plants are organic solids that come from the Earth. However, we can
change the solid state of plants with the application of heat and turn them
into liquid forms to create essential oil tinctures. We cannot change the solid
state of Crystals, though, which is why their energies are denser than the
energies of Aromatherapy fragrances.
Aromatherapy scents are known for activating old memories and
restoring our emotions to their peaceful state. Many fragrances are also
known for improving our overall mood since they stimulate the
Hypothalamus to send messages to the Pituitary Gland to create feel-good
brain chemicals like serotonin. When we are calm and happy, the mind
becomes tranquil, raising the vibration of our consciousness. For this reason,
burning incense or diffusing oils is beneficial before starting meditation as it
cleanses the space and calms us down, enabling us to go deeper within
ourselves.
When we apply essential oils topically, while the scent enters the lungs
and nostrils, even more molecules are absorbed into the skin directly,
providing immediate physical benefits. In addition, we can use the topical
application of essential oils to cure skin-related issues, including healing a
rash or minor wound, stopping an infection, soothing pain from a sunburn,
or alleviating itching from bug bites. Massage therapists like using essential
oils directly on the skin to relax the muscles and manage pain.

Essential Oils For the Seven Chakras
Every Chakra has unique properties that correspond with certain
essential oils. Therefore, we can use essential oils on the body to promote
balanced Chakra functioning. The method described below can be used on
one Chakra at a time to optimize its energy flow or on multiple Chakras that
require healing. You can also apply this method to all Seven Chakras at the
same time to bring alignment to the entire Chakric system. However, since

essential oils have to be applied onto the body where the Chakras are
located, we cannot target the Transpersonal Chakras with this particular
application method.
When using essential oils to heal and balance the Chakras, never apply
them directly on the skin without diluting them first with a carrier oil.
Essential oil blends enhance and maximize the therapeutic and medicinal
effects. There are a variety of carrier oils you can use to make essential
blends for the Chakras, including jojoba oil or fractionated coconut oil. The
ratio to keep in mind is two to three drops of an essential oil per one
teaspoon of carrier oil. The essential oil blends are best applied with a
standard 10ml roll-on bottle. If you are using a different type of bottle, you
can use your finger to apply the oil instead.
To apply an essential oil blend, rub some of it onto the front or back of
the body where the Chakra is located. Use just enough to cover an area of
about 1.5"-2" in diameter. Once applied, you may leave it on your body for
the entirety of the day to obtain maximum therapeutic effects. The only way
to stop the continued healing influence of the essential blend(s) is to wash
them off your body with a strong soap, although some of the mixture usually
lingers on the skin's surface.
Keep in mind that once you have applied the essential oil blend for
more than an hour, changes in your energy will have already taken place,
even though your consciousness may need more time to integrate them.
Therefore, it helps to meditate immediately after application to speed up the
integration process.
Use Table 2 to find the most appropriate essential oil(s) to use on each
Chakra. Certain essential oils have an energizing effect on a Chakra, while
others have a calming one. Balancing oils are good to bring Chakras into
equilibrium, whether they are underactive or overactive. When the Chakra is
underactive, the vibration emitted by the chosen essential oil will accelerate
the spin of the Chakra, returning it to its optimum velocity. When it is
overactive, the vibration will slow down the spin of the Chakra and bring it
into balance.
Use a carrier oil to make an essential oil blend for each Chakra you
want to work on. Your intention is of utmost importance, as it is to be
consistent and follow the correspondences given in Table 2. You can make a
collection of essential oil blends for Chakric healing in this way, which you
can use in your future healing sessions.

You can also make single blends of multiple oils, so long as they
correspond with the Chakra you are targeting and whether you are trying to
energize, calm, or balance it. For example, if you are making a 10ml oil
blend (two teaspoons) to balance an overactive Muladhara Chakra, you
should use four to six essential oil drops of a combination of calming oils
pertaining only to this Chakra. Experiment with mixing the essential oil
blends using the Table below for reference.
TABLE 2: Essential Oils for the Seven Chakras
Chakra Name
(Sanskrit &

Energizing
Oils

Oils

English)
Cinnamon,
Muladhara,
Root or Base

Calming
Oils
Vetiver,

Cardamom,

Patchouli,

Black Pepper,

Cedarwood,

Ginger, Cypress Myrrh, Basil
Orange,
Swadhisthana, Mandarin,
Sacral or Spleen

Manipura,
Solar Plexus

Heart

Ylang-Ylang,
Clary Sage,

Bergamot

Neroli

Lemon,
Lemongrass,
Ginger, Lime,
Juniper

Anahata,

Rosewood,

Lemon,

Grapefruit,

Palmarosa,
Pine, Rosewood,
Bergamot

Balancing

Vetiver,
Bergamot,
Fennel,
Rosemary
Rose,

Application
on Body
(Front/Back)

Sandalwood,
Frankincense,
Geranium

Between
Perineum and
Coccyx, Bottom
of Feet, or Both

Neroli,

Lower

Jasmine,

Abdomen

Helichrysum,

(Below Navel),

Sandalwood,

Lower Back, or

Elemi

Both

Black Pepper,

Solar

Spikenard,

Plexus, Mid

Helichrysum

Back, or Both

Jasmine,

Between

Marjoram,

Melissa,

Breasts (Centre),

Cedarwood,

Sandalwood,

Upper Back, or

Eucalyptus

Geranium

both

Roman
Vishuddhi,
Throat

Peppermint, Chamomile,

Coriander,

Middle of

Cypress, Lemon, Basil,

Geranium,

Throat, Back of

Spearmint, Sage Rosemary,

Eucalyptus

Neck, or Both

Bergamot

Ajna, Brow,

Clary Sage,

German

Mind's Eye, Third Pine, Lavender,

Chamomile,

Helichrysum,

Eyebrows, Back

Eye

Myrrh

Basil,

Jasmine

of Head, or Both.

Sandalwood,

Patchouli,

Also, Middle of

Juniper

Cedarwood,

Forehead (Fifth

Thyme

Eye)

Sahasrara,
Crown

Lavender,
Saffron, Palo
Santo

Rosewood,

Frankincense,

Between the

Frankincense,

Thyme,

Myrrh,

Cedarwood,

Helichrysum,

Neroli, Lotus

Sandalwood

Top of Head
(centre)

THE TATTVAS
Tattva, or Tattwa, is a Sanskrit word meaning "principle, "truth," or
"reality." It signifies "thatness," which can be understood further as the
"essence which creates the feeling of existence." In The Vedas, Tattvas are
sacred formulas or reality principles that denote the identity of the individual
Self and God-the Creator. They represent the body of God, which is the
Universe itself, and our own body that experiences nature through
consciousness.
There are five primary Tattvas (Figure 80), representing nature’s essence
that manifests as the Five Elements. The five Tattvas are known as Akasha
(Spirit), Vayu (Air), Tejas (Fire), Apas (Water), and Prithivi (Earth). The first
four Tattvas (Prithivi, Apas, Tejas, Vayu) represent modes or qualities of the
Solar energy of Prana in varying degrees of vibrations. They are a
consequence of Light and sound emanations, which merge into the final
Tattva, or principle—Akasha, the Spirit/Aethyr Element.
The Tattvas are primal and simple in form; they assume the five main
shapes within the range of human perception—the square, crescent moon,
triangle, circle, and egg. Tattvas are presented on cards with a white
background that brings out their shape and colour. They are classified as
"Yantras"—tools for mental concentration and meditation. Yantras are
mystical diagrams from the Tantric tradition and Indian religion that come in
many geometric shapes and configurations, often very complex. Other than
using them as meditation tools, Hindu people often use Yantras to worship
Deities in Temples or at home. They also use them as talismans for protection
or to bring good fortune.
Tattvas are perhaps the simplest Yantras in existence. In the simplicity
of their shapes and colours, however, lies the potential to make a powerful
connection with the primordial Five Elements that exist on a Microcosmic
level. As such, we can obtain a connection into the Macrocosmic level—As
Above, So Below. Therefore, by mastering the Elements within ourselves, we
develop the ability to alter and change reality with our thoughts, becoming
master manifesters.
Kundalini Shakti is the subtlest form of energy (feminine) and an
inseparable part of pure consciousness (masculine)—represented by Lord
Shiva, Shakti’s consort. Although energy and consciousness have separated

and diversified to give rise to Creation, they are forever striving to re-unite.
This process is exemplified by Kundalini energy rising from the bottom of
the spine to the top (Crown) of the head.

Figure 80: The Five Major Tattvas
The purpose of a Kundalini awakening is not only Enlightenment for the
individual in whose body this process takes place but for Shakti and Shiva to
re-experience the Cosmic unity from which they evolved. However, as the
Kundalini rises, the individual experiences the full awakening and infusion of
Light into the Seven Chakras, whose energies can be broken down into the
Five Elements, represented by the five primary Tattvas. As such, by working
with the Tattvas, you are working on tuning your Chakras and healing the
Karmic energy contained therein.

The Process of Creation
During the process of Creation, the infinite White Light gradually
lowered its vibration, manifesting the Five Elements in successive stages.
Each of the five primary Tattvas represents one of the creative processes,
beginning with Spirit, followed by Air, Fire, Water, and then Earth as
Creation’s final materialisation. According to the Eastern and Western
Esoteric Mysteries regarding this subject, each Element (Tattva) is part of a
connected series in which each successive Element (Tattva) is derived from
its predecessor. Also, all the Tattvas should be regarded as an extension of
pure consciousness and not as individual principles that exist separately.

The first Tattva, Akasha (Spirit), is an amalgamation of energy and
Matter that contains an infinite amount of potential energy in the Sea of
Consciousness. As Akasha's energy began to vibrate in the evolution process,
it created movement that manifested the Tattva Vayu (Air). Vayu's particles
have the maximum freedom of movement since Air is the least tenuous of the
lower Four Elements. As the creative process continued, the perpetual motion
of Vayu generated heat, causing the emergence of the next Tattva, Tejas
(Fire).
Since the movement of the energy of Tejas was less than Vayu, it
enabled it to expel part of its radiative heat, which cooled down to create the
Apas Tattva (Water). With Apas, the Spirit, Air, and Fire particles became
confined within constricted space, with limited but fluid motion. As the
vibration of Creation's manifestation further lowered, however, Apas
solidified into the Tattva Prithivi (Earth), the next and final stage in the
process of Creation. Prithivi is the equivalent of the Malkuth Sephira on the
Tree of Life, representing the World of Matter, the physical reality.
It should be noted that during the creative process, subtle states gave rise
to grosser, denser states that are lower in vibration than the preceding state.
The higher the vibration, the higher the state of consciousness and the
Element it corresponds with. Also, keep in mind that the cause is an essential
part of the effect. Earth contains the Elements of Water, Fire, Air, and Spirit,
since it evolved out of them, while Spirit does not since it precedes all the
Elements.
I described in The Magus that when you work with one Element’s
energy, by the time you have completed its Spiritual Alchemy process, the
next Element in sequence unveils itself before you. Therefore, there is no fine
line where one Element ends and the other begins, but all five are connected
as part of one sequence.
You will notice that the Eastern sequence of emanation of the Elements
is slightly different than the Western one—the Air Element comes
immediately after Spirit, instead of the Fire Element. According to the
Eastern Spiritual system, the Air Element is less dense and more ethereal
than Fire, so Ancient Rishis put Air before Fire in the sequence of Creation's
manifestation. I will discuss this variation between the Eastern and Western
systems in depth in the following Yoga section, specifically "The Five
Koshas" chapter.

The Thirty Tattvas System
Each of the five Tattvas has five Sub-Tattvas that relate to different
Planes of the main Tattva they pertain to. For instance, a Fire Tattva has five
Sub-Elements: Fire of Fire, Spirit of Fire, Water of Fire, Air of Fire, and
Earth of Fire. By working with the Sub-Elements of the Tattvas, we have a
more precise way to tune into the exact energy we desire.
The principal energies that affect our Solar System, Planetary and
Zodiacal, can all be broken down into Sub-Elements, corresponding with
different parts of the Self. They relate to the connecting paths of the Tree of
Life (Tarot Cards) and energies that filter one state of consciousness into
another. These states of consciousness are ten in number, represented by the
ten Spheres of the Tree of Life in the Qabalah.
There are six main schools of thought on Tattvic philosophy in India.
The original Tattva system was developed by the Vedic Sage Kapila in the
sixth century BC as part of his Samkhya philosophy, which heavily
influenced the science of Yoga. Samkhya philosophy uses a system of
twenty-five Tattvas, while Shaivism recognises thirty-six Tattvas. The
Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn uses the thirty Tattvas system since this
particular breakdown corresponds with the Elements and Sub-Elements
found on the Qabalistic Tree of Life. This system includes the five primary
Tattvas and the twenty-five Sub-Elemental Tattvas (Figure 81). Considering
that I have the most extensive experience with this particular system, it is the
one I will adhere to in this book.

Figure 81: The Twenty-Five Sub-Elemental Tattvas
Since working with Tattvas requires our sense of sight that perceives
colours and shapes in the environment, this vibrational healing modality is

associated with the Element of Fire and the Higher Mental Plane. Thus, it
enables us to go deeper within ourselves than with other healing modalities
presented in this book. And since Fire relies on Air for sustenance, there is an
Air Element component also in working with the Tattvas, corresponding with
the Lower Mental Plane.
Therefore, the Mental Plane that utilizes our willpower and thoughts is
our contact point for reaching the Higher and lower Cosmic Planes,
represented by the Tattvas. Moreover, this symbiotic relationship between the
Elements of Fire and Air is evident in nature's processes. For example, the
physical fire, or flame, requires oxygen for sustenance; without it, it dies. In
the same way, intention and willpower cannot succeed in any undertaking
without thoughts and imagination.
As mentioned earlier, working with the Tattvas is akin to working with
the Elements through Ceremonial Magick ritual exercises presented in The
Magus. However, Ceremonial Magick deals mainly with invocations, or
calling in particular energies from the outside Universe into your Aura, while
working with Tattvas constitutes as an evocation, meaning that you access or
"draw out" a specific type of energy within yourself for introspection.
Hence, Ceremonial Magick ritual exercises invoke a more significant
amount of Elemental energy into the Aura while Tattvas only work with our
inner, natural energies.
However, the benefit of Tattvas over Ceremonial Magick ritual exercises
is that you can zero in on the Sub-Elements effortlessly using their respective
Tattva cards (Yantras). In contrast, the only ritual exercises in Ceremonial
Magick that enable you to accomplish the same goal are Enochian Keys
which are very advanced and carry a lot of Karmic energy specific to that
egregore. I left warning notes in multiple pages of The Magus concerning
working with Enochian Magick because it requires over a dozen months of
preparation with other, more basic Elemental invocations. With SubElemental Tattvas, however, you can jump right in.

The Five Major Tattvas
Akasha Tattva (Spirit Element)
The first Tattva, Akasha, corresponds with the Spirit Element. Akasha
represents the void of space, the Aethyr, symbolized by a black or indigo
ovoid, or egg. Spirit and Aethyr are interchangeable terms that stand for the
same thing—the Akasha. The black colour of Akasha reflects the darkness of

the void, which we can see in the vast space between the Heavenly bodies
(Stars and Planets) in the Universe. When we close our eyes, we also
mentally see this same darkness of space before us, implying that Akasha is
within us as well. Although blackness is the absence of Light, it contains all
the colours of the spectrum within itself. As such, it is infinite in potential
and scope. For example, one black hole in the Universe contains more mass
than millions of Stars combined.
Akasha is equated with the White Light principle that stretches out
infinitely in all directions. Hermeticists refer to it as the First Mind of Godthe Creator (The All). Another name is the "Monad," which means
"singularity" in Greek. The darkness of space is merely a reflection of the
White Light on a physical level, manifested by the Second Mind, which was
generated (birthed) by the First Mind through the process of differentiation.
Although we cannot enter the First Mind while living, we can experience its
potential by awakening the Cosmic Consciousness within us (via the
Kundalini), which bridges the First and Second Minds.
The manifested Universe, including all the Galaxies and Stars in
existence, are contained within the Second Mind. Matter is a by-product of
the Spiritual energy that is invisible to the senses but permeates all things. As
the essence of everything, Akasha's vibration is so high that it appears
motionless, unlike the other Four Elements, which are constantly in motion
and can be experienced through the physical senses. Akasha is
undifferentiated Matter containing an infinite amount of potential energy. In
other words, Matter and energy exist in their dormant potential state within
the Spirit Element at the very heart of Creation. Akasha was never born, and
it will never die. It cannot be subtracted from nor added to.
The Spiritual energy of the First Mind manifests into the Second Mind
through the Stars as visible Light. However, Spirit is said to travel faster than
the speed of Light, having the highest velocity known to humanity. This
would explain why information channelled via the Cosmic Consciousness is
instantaneously transmitted anywhere in the Universe. And why Spiritually
evolved people need to merely think of an object or place, and they
immediately experience what it is like to be that object or be in that place
through thought.
Since it travels faster than the speed of Light, Spiritual energy
transcends space and time according to Einstein's Theory of Relativity. As
such, it is not uncommon for Spiritually awakened people to develop the
sense of precognition or prescience, enabling them to see into the future via

the sixth's sense (psychism). Spiritual consciousness allows one access to the
Akashic Records.
In Hermetic Alchemy, Akasha is the Quintessence. It is all-penetrating
since everything in existence evolved out of Akasha, and into Akasha,
everything will eventually return. Akasha relates to the principle of sound
vibration. It provides the medium for sound to travel through space. Akasha
is the source of the other Four Elements that evolved through Creation's
manifestation process.
The Planetary energy of Saturn influences Akasha, exemplified by the
colours indigo and black that correspond with both. In the Qabalah, Saturn
relates to the Sephira Binah, one of the Supernals representing the Spirit
Element. Binah is the Astral blueprint of everything in existence, the subtle,
ethereal forms of all things that are invisible to the physical senses but that
we can experience through the Mind's Eye. The vibration of Akasha can only
be accessed when the mind is silenced, and the Ego is transcended. In Yogic
and Hindu philosophy, its realm of experience is the Plane of consciousness,
termed "Jana Loka," the abode of the liberated mortals who dwell in the
Heavenly Realm.
Akasha is attributed to the three Chakras of Vishuddhi, Ajna, and
Sahasrara (Figure 82). At the level of Sahasrara, Akasha is best expressed by
the Infinity symbol, a figure eight on its side, representing the concept of
Eternity and limitlessness. At Ajna's level, Akasha is best symbolized by the
Taoist Yin/Yang symbol, representing duality, the feminine and masculine
forces, Ida and Pingala, that unite at Ajna Chakra. Vishuddhi is the traditional
representative of the Akasha Tattva in Tantra and Yoga, at its most accessible
level that connects it with the lower Elements and Chakras.
Akasha's Bija Mantra is "Ham." (More on the Bija Mantras in the
following section on Yoga.) Experiencing the energy of Akasha Tattva
resembles the effect of Spirit Element ritual invocations and Saturnalian
energy, although the latter can be best described as the Earthy aspect of
Akasha. The Sub-Elements of Akasha are Spirit of Spirit, Fire of Spirit,
Water of Spirit, Air of Spirit, and Earth of Spirit.

Figure 82: The Tattvas and the Chakras

Vayu Tattva (Air Element)
The Hindu religious text, The Upanishads, teach that the first principle
or Tattva to evolve out of Akasha is Vayu, symbolized by a blue circle.
"Vayu" comes from the same Sanskrit root word for "motion" and is
consequently attributed to the Element of Air. Having the nature of wind,
Vayu takes on a blue colour of the clear sky.
As the void of Akasha became influenced by motion during the creative
process, Light energy was created, manifesting the Vayu Tattva. However,
Vayu is not physical Light but kinetic energy in its diverse forms: electrical,
chemical, and vital energy (Prana). As Akasha was motionless, Vayu is allpervading motion.
All gases within the Earth's atmosphere, including oxygen, encompass
the Vayu Tattva. Although invisible to the naked eye, Vayu is the first Tattva
that can be felt tangibly on the skin. As such, it relates to the sense of touch.
The essence of Vayu is expressed through contraction and expansion. In the
physical body, Vayu controls the five vital "airs" called the Prana Vayus:
Prana, Apana, Samana, Udana, Vyana.
Vayu is attributed to Anahata, the Heart Chakra. It relates to the mind,
thoughts, and imagination, powered by the breathing process—bringing
Pranic energy into the body. The constant motion of Vayu Tattva creates
change, causing instability, inconsistency, volatility, and fickleness in the
individual and the environment. Such is the nature of the Air Element. Its
realm of experience is the Plane of consciousness, termed "Maha Loka," the
home of the great Sages and Rishis.
The Bija Mantra of Vayu Tatva is "Yam." Its energy is comparable to
Air Element ritual invocations and invocations of the Planet Mercury with
aspects of Sun energy. After all, Vayu is an extension of Pranic energy, whose
source is the Sun. The Sub-Elements of Vayu are Air of Air, Spirit of Air,
Fire of Air, Water of Air, and Earth of Air. The Sub-Element Air of Air is
akin to the energy of the Aquarius Zodiac, while Fire of Air is similar to
Libra and Water of Air to Gemini.
Tejas Tattva (Fire Element)
Tejas, or Agni (fire), is the Fire Element Tattva. Tejas means "sharp" in
Sanskrit; its meaning translates to "heat" or "illumination." Tejas Tattva is
symbolized by an upwards red triangle whose colour is associated with its
Archetypal energy. However, when placed on the body, the triangle points

downwards towards the Apas (Water) Element (Figure 82). The concept of
"Water up, Fire Down" explains our body’s natural energy flow.
As Fire is the source of heat and Light, it is the first principle whose
form is visible to the naked eye. After all, it is by the appearance of Light we
perceive forms in our environment. Thus, Tejas is the quality that gives
definition or structure to the different expressions of kinetic energy
represented by Vayu Tatva, from which Tejas has evolved.
The birth of form is closely connected with the advent of the Ego—the
Soul's antithesis. The Ego was born when we recognized something outside
of ourselves for the first time. As we acclimatized to the material world in
our early years, we became attached to forms we saw in the environment,
which allowed the Ego to grow, taking a firm hold over the consciousness.
Thus, Samskaras developed over time, a Sanskrit term implying mental
impressions, recollections, and psychological imprints. Samskaras are the
root of Karmic energy that holds us back from Spiritually evolving until we
overcome it.
The Ego's development continues into our teenage years, forming our
personality over time. The Ego doesn't stop growing and expanding for the
rest of our life here on Earth since it is tied to the physical body and its
survival. The only way to halt the Ego's growth is to recognize and embrace
the deeper Spiritual reality that underlies the physical one—one which is void
and therefore form-less. When our attention focuses on Spiritual Evolution
instead of feeding the Ego, the Soul finally takes over, and we begin building
character that transcends our material existence.
As mentioned before, the Ego and the Soul cannot co-exist as drivers of
consciousness; one always has to assume the passenger seat. That choice is
determined by us and which aspect of the Self we give our attention to in any
given moment since we have Free Will. Therefore, Tejas relates to both the
Soul and the Ego. The Fire Element is the willpower we use to express our
Free Will principle in either direction, powered by Manipura, the Solar
Plexus Chakra. Its realm of experience is the Plane of consciousness, termed
"Swar Loka," the region between the Sun and the Polar Star, the Heaven of
the Hindu God Indra.
Tejas Tattva has often been described as a devouring force that
consumes everything in its path. However, destruction is a catalyst for
transformation since nothing ever dies but only changes its state. As such, the
Fire Element is crucial to Spiritual Evolution since it enables us to remake
our beliefs about ourselves and the world, allowing us to tap into our highest

potential. Tejas' destruction, therefore, results in new creations propitious to
the Soul's growth.
Tejas’ Bija Mantra is "Ram." This Tattva's energy is comparable to a
ritual invocation of the Fire Element and the energy of Planet Mars with
aspects of the Sun's energy. Tejas is masculine and active as it stimulates the
individual's drive and willpower. The Sub-Elements of Tejas are Fire of Fire,
Spirit of Fire, Air of Fire, Water of Fire, and Earth of Fire. The Sub-Element
Fire of Fire is akin to the energy of the Aries Zodiac, while Air of Fire is
similar to Leo and Water of Fire to Sagittarius.
Apas Tattva (Water Element)
The next Tattva in the sequence of manifestation is Apas, symbolized by
the silver crescent moon. Apas is intensely active Matter that emerged out of
the Fire Element because of decreased motion and condensation. It is
confined within a definitive space while in a state of fluidity.
Apas is the physical Universe still arranging itself before it materializes
as the next Tattva. It represents order arising out of chaos. The arrangement
of atoms and molecules in Apas take up very little space with limited
freedom of movement, unlike the Fire, Air, and Spirit Elements. For
example, hydrogen and oxygen behave differently than those same molecules
in vapour.
Apas is feminine and passive; it is attributed to Swadhisthana, the Sacral
Chakra. Apas relates to the Moon's effect upon the tides of the sea and the
Element of Water within us. Considering our own physical body is made up
of 60% water, the importance of the Water Element in terms of our biological
system is obvious.
Since Apas is Matter that is still being created, it represents the creative
impulse within our psyche. It relates to the emotions that are fluid and
changeable, like the Water Element that represents them. Our sexuality is
also expressed emotionally as desire, serving as a powerful motivator in our
lives. The Moon cycles not only have a strong influence on our emotions but
our sexuality as well.
Apas has the quality of contraction and the principle of taste. It’s Bija
Mantra is "Vam." Experiences of Apas are similar to ritual invocations of the
Water Element. Its Planetary correspondence is with the Moon and Jupiter
and aspects of Venus since all three Planets are associated with emotion and
feelings.

The Sub-Elements of Apas are Water of Water, Spirit of Water, Fire of
Water, Air of Water, and Earth of Water. The Sub-Element of Water of Water
is akin to the energy of the Pisces Zodiac, while Fire of Water is similar to
Cancer and Air of Water to Scorpio. Apas' realm of experience is the Plane of
consciousness termed "Bhuvar Loka," the area between the Earth and the Sun
and home to celestial beings known as Siddhas.
Prithivi Tattva (Earth Element)
The fifth and final Tattva is Prithivi, symbolized by a yellow square and
related to the Element of Earth. The last Element that evolves in the process
of Creation results from a further decrease in vibration that causes the Water
Element to solidify and become motionless. Prithivi is the densest of all the
Tattvas, as it represents the concrete World of Matter whose molecules are
fixed in place. It represents the qualities of solidity, weight, and cohesion,
bringing stability and permanence on all levels.
Although the yellow colour typically represents the Air Element in the
Western Mysteries, in the Tattvic system, it is associated with Earth. Yellow
relates to the yellow Light of the Sun that allows us to perceive the World of
Matter. Prithivi’s correspondence is with the Root or Muladhara Chakra and
the sense of smell. Its Bija Mantra is "Lam."
Prithivi’s energy is similar to the ritual invocations of the Earth Element.
The Sub-Elements of Prithivi are Earth of Earth, Spirit of Earth, Fire of
Earth, Water of Earth, and Air of Earth. The Sub-Element of Fire of Earth’s
energy is akin to the Capricorn Zodiac, while Water of Earth is similar to
Virgo and Air of Earth can be compared to Taurus. Prithivi’s realm of
experience is the Plane of consciousness termed "Bhu Loka," the Physical
World of gross Matter.

Tattva Scrying
Tattvas are easy to use and very effective in tuning you into the desired
Elemental energies. One simply needs to hold a Tattva in their hand and
"scry" it by gazing, or looking deeply into it, to unlock its power. Scrying
Tattvas is instrumental in developing psychic powers such as clairvoyance. It
is one of the easiest, fastest, and most effective methods of exercising and
improving your clairvoyant abilities.
The Tattva Scrying method can also facilitate a full Out-of-Body
Experience since it includes an Astral Projection component whose technique
is akin to Shamanic journeying and pathworking. However, you need to be

cautious when attempting Astral Projection, especially if you suffer from
anxiety or nervousness. It can be quite a jolt for the mind to experience things
beyond the physical, especially your first time. Therefore, you should be
sufficiently energetically balanced before attempting Astral Projection, which
you can achieve with the use of Spiritual Healing modalities presented in this
book.
Before starting this exercise, you will need to print out the Tattva cards
in colour from my website at www.nevenpaar.com by following the "Tattva
Cards" link in the main navigation. The cards in the PDF document are five
by six inches, which is their ideal size for scrying purposes, with the symbols
around three to four inches in height. If you already own Tattva cards,
proceed to work with them so long as they fall within the given parameters.
However, the most optimal Tattva cards should be self-constructed out
of cardboard. You should cut out the symbols separately, paint them by hand,
and glue them onto the cards to provide a Three-Dimensional perspective.
Figure 83 shows the Tattva cards I constructed many years ago when I was in
the Golden Dawn Order.

Figure 83: The Author’s Tattva Cards

There are two parts of the Tattva Scrying method as presented by the
Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn. The first part is called "Scrying in the
Spirit Vision," which involves tuning into the Elemental and Sub-Elemental
energy within your Aura, which isolates your Chakras so you can work with
them. The second part is optional, and it is a continuation of the first, called
"Travelling in the Spirit Vision." After evoking the Elemental or SubElemental energy and amplifying it in your Aura, your consciousness
becomes immersed in it. This is an excellent opportunity to perform an Astral
Projection into its Cosmic Plane using a visualisation technique that involves
your imagination and willpower.
Before starting the Tattva Scrying exercise, find a quiet space where you
will be undisturbed during its performance. Since the practice involves going
inwards, it is advisable to burn some incense to clear your space of negative
energies and make it sacred. If you are familiar with the Ceremonial Magick
Ritual exercises from my first book, perform the Lesser Banishing Ritual of
the Pentagram and the Banishing Ritual of the Hexagram to banish adverse
energy influences and centre yourself.
These two ritual exercises are instrumental for protection when doing
Astral work, including Astral Projection which opens the consciousness to
direct contact with Spiritual Intelligences within the inner Cosmic Planes.
Other than basic Elementals, these can be Angelic or Demonic entities or
Spirits that lodged themselves in the layers of your Aura and their respective
Chakras sometime in the past. They are responsible for many of our moods
and feelings, whether positive and constructive ones, as in the case of Angels,
or negative and destructive ones as influenced by Demons.
Demons are more elusive than Angels since people generally avoid
dealing with them. Often, they become locked away deep in the subconscious
mind out of fear of having to face them. However, Demons will remain
attached to you until you confront them with courage and learn their true
nature, thereby fully integrating their powers and releasing them back into
the Universe. In doing so, you are healing and optimising the Chakras while
mastering their corresponding Elements within your psyche. Remember that
whatever Spiritual Intelligence you may encounter in your scrying session, if
you confront it with poise and love in your heart, they will be at your service.
Tattva Scrying Method-Part 1 (Scrying in the Spirit Vision)
Begin the exercise by sitting comfortably in the Lotus position or on a
chair while facing the cardinal direction of the Element you are scrying. (Use

Table 3 to obtain all relevant information you will need to scry the Tattvas.)
You should have a white surface in front of you, such as a wall, or screen, or
some sort of background since you will need to transpose the Astral imprint
of the Tattva onto it as part of the exercise. The white surface also ensures no
distractions for the mind when concentrating on the Tattva card. If you have
hanging pictures or furniture close to your working area, remove them.
Perform the Four-Fold Breath for a few minutes with your eyes closed
to get yourself into a meditative state of mind, which is essential for success
in this work. Next, open your eyes and take up the Tattva. Hold it in your
hand at arm’s length so that the image is at eye level. Begin gazing at it
comfortably, blinking as little as possible. Ensure that you see the Tattva card
and the white background before you and nothing else. Don’t allow your eyes
to wander. Instead, get absorbed into the Tattva while keeping your mind
empty of all thoughts. Allow its image to fill your consciousness as you
imagine being soaked in the energy of its associated Element or SubElement.
You should gaze at the Tattva for twenty seconds to one minute initially
and then lengthen your duration as you become more proficient at this
exercise. Make sure not to strain your eyes at any point. After some time, the
Tattva will begin to "flash" out of the symbol you are gazing at, like you are
seeing its energy imprint or Aura. Experience will teach you how long it
takes to get to this point.
The next step is to put down the Tattva card and smoothly switch your
gaze onto the plain white surface in front of you. You will notice the
transference of the symbol into its "flashing" or complementary colour to the
Tattva. For example, if you are scrying Prithivi, its complementary colour
will be violet. If you are scrying a Sub-Elemental Tattva, you will see two
complementary colours flashing in front of you.
Now gaze at the flashing symbol before you. If it starts to drift, bring it
back into focus in front of you. Once it vanishes in your physical sight, close
your eyes and focus on what remains of its mental imprint. Let your physical
vision transition into Astral vision as if the back of your eyelids is a movie
screen replaying the image back to you.
It is advisable to practise transferring the Tattva card visually onto the
white background three to four times since this part of the exercise is most
important for the next step of Astral Projection. However, simply by gazing
at the Tattva, you are unlocking its associated energy in your Aura, which
you should feel immediately (if you are sensitive to energies) as a

quantifiable essence. Note that the longer you gaze at the Tattva, the more of
its corresponding energy permeates the Aura.
Tattva Scrying Method-Part 2 (Travelling in the Spirit Vision)
After the Astral image vanishes, use your imagination to bring it back in
your Mind’s Eye in the complementary colour of the Tattva you are working
with. Imagine the image becoming enlarged to the size of a door. Next,
visualize your Astral form and see it standing right before this doorway. Take
a moment to note all the details of your Astral Self, including your wardrobe,
facial expressions, etc. If it helps your visualization, imagine yourself
wearing the same clothes you are wearing while doing the exercise. Note that
you should be looking at yourself in the third-person in your mind for this
part of the exercise like you are both the director and the star of the movie as
one.
Next, you need to transfer your seed of consciousness into your Astral
Self. This part is tricky and is where most students need practise. To do it
successfully, you need to stop viewing yourself in the third-person and switch
your perspective to first-person. Imagine your entire essence entering your
Astral Self as you exit your physical body, which remains sitting quietly with
eyes closed. Take a moment now by opening your eyes as your Astral Self
and observe your hands and feet as if you just woke up inside of a Lucid
Dream. Next, look at the doorway in front of you, your portal to another
dimension. When you are ready, pass through the doorway. If you are
familiar with the ritual exercises from The Magus, you can project your
Astral Self through the doorway with the Sign of the Enterer while sealing
yourself in the corresponding Cosmic Plane with the Sign of Silence. If you
are unfamiliar with these gestures, simply step through the doorway.
The moment you step into the projected Cosmic Plane, allow your
imagination to go on autopilot. This part is crucial to success with Astral
Projection since everything up to this point was a guided visualization using
your willpower and imagination. Now you must stop controlling the
experience so that your imagination gets its impression from the Elemental or
Sub-Elemental energy that you amplified in your Aura with the Tattva gazing
technique. If done correctly, you should obtain a vision of the Cosmic Plane.
Observe the scenery around you, noting every little detail you can see.
Use your Astral senses to take in the sights, sounds, tastes, smells, and tactile
sensations of the Cosmic Plane. If things appear dull and unanimated, you
can vibrate the Divine Names of the corresponding Element three or four

times each as per Table 3. The sequence to follow is God Name, Archangel,
and Angel. Doing so should bring things to vivid colour and movement. If it
does not, then you may need more practise transferring your consciousness
into your Astral Self and allowing yourself to "let go" long enough to
experience a vision in the Astral Plane. Don’t despair if this does not work
the first few times; most people need more practise with Part 1 of the Tattva
Scrying Method before engaging in Part 2.
TABLE 3: Tattva Correspondences
Element
(English &

Direction

God
Elementals Name

Sanskrit)
Earth,
Prithivi
Water,
Apas
Fire,
Tejas
Air,
Vayu
Spirit,
Akasha

Archangel

Angel

Auriel

Phorlakh

Gabriel

Taliahad

Michael

Aral

Raphael

Chassan

(Hebrew)
North

Gnomes

West

Undines

South

Salamanders

East

Sylphs

Up/Down,
East (default)

-

Adonai
ha-Aretz
Elohim
Tzabaoth
YHVH
Tzabaoth
Shaddai
El Chai
Eheieh

Metatron

Chayoth
ha-Qadesh

After vibrating the appropriate Divine Names, it is not uncommon to see
a Spiritual guide appear before you. This entity is often an Elemental whose
characteristics represent the qualities of the Element you are visiting. You can
also summon a guide to help you explore the place, which is recommended,
especially if you are new to this practice.
Observe the entity's appearance and test it by asking its purpose in
assisting you, which will help you determine whether it is benevolent or
malevolent. Sometimes you may not see an entity but feel its presence, which
can often be more trustworthy than the use of Astral sight or other senses.
If the entity appears malevolent, you can use the Divine Names of the
Element you are working with to banish it. You can also draw a banishing

Pentagram of Earth (as instructed in The Magus) to dismiss the entity, unless
you are working with Prithivi Tattva, which will cause a banishing of both
positive and negative aspects of Earth. If for some reason you don't want the
assistance of a guide, you can use the banishing Pentagram of the Element
you are working with to send them away, which works in most cases.
Assuming that your guide is a positive Spirit that wants to help you,
allow it to lead you around so that you can explore the scenery. Ask your
guide any questions about what you are seeing on your journey or the nature
of the Element pertaining to the Cosmic Plane you are exploring. After all,
this work aims to develop knowledge and mastery over the Elements which
are parts of your psyche.
When exploring Sub-Elemental Cosmic Planes, it is not uncommon to
be passed onto a second guide who will show you around a different scenery
altogether. In this case, you need to test them again to determine the quality
of their Being, including vibrating the Divine Names of the secondary Tattva
you are visiting. When leaving the first guide behind, grant them the courtesy
of a goodbye, especially if they treated you with respect.
If you feel that the environment has become chaotic with your presence,
you can use the Divine Names to bring harmony and peace to the Cosmic
Plane you are visiting and restore its original constitution. Remember always
to be respectful but firm with your guides and not let them get out of line
since they are there to assist you. You must always maintain composure and
control over the situation.
The method of leaving the Cosmic Plane and returning to ordinary,
waking consciousness is the exact reversal of the initial process. Firstly,
thank the guide and bid them farewell. Then you must retrace your footsteps
back to the doorway from whence you came. Once you step through the
doorway, your journey will be complete. If you used the Sign of the Enterer
and Sign of Silence to enter the doorway, then use it again to leave it.
Next, you need to transfer your seed of consciousness from your Astral
Self to your physical Self. In doing so, feel your Being switching from an
internal to an external perspective as you shift your attention from your
Astral senses to your physical ones. Take a few deep breaths now as you
focus on listening to any sounds in your environment. When you are ready to
end your Tattva Scrying experience, slowly open your eyes. If you started
this exercise with the Lesser Banishing Ritual of the Pentagram and the
Banishing Ritual of the Hexagram, repeat them to centre yourself and banish
any unwanted influences.

It is crucial never to simply end the experience by opening your physical
eyes while your Astral Self is still within the Cosmic Plane you are visiting.
There should never be a merging of an Elemental Plane into the Physical
Plane of consciousness since doing so can be detrimental for the psyche. The
immediate side-effects are feeling confused, disoriented, and spaced out. The
more lasting side-effects include chaotic and destructive manifestations in
your life, which can go on for weeks, months, and even years, until becoming
resolved. Therefore, take your time with this "returning home" process and
follow all the steps, even if you do them in a fast-tracked manner.

***
As a beginner, start by practising with the primary Tattvas of Prithivi,
Apas, Tejas, Vayu, and Akasha, in that order. Focus on the first four until you
gain some experience before moving to Akasha Tattva. Perform each scrying
session with an individual Tattva card once a day, not more. You can perform
this exercise anytime, although mornings and afternoons are best, preferably
on an empty stomach. If you scry the Tattvas right before sleep, anticipate
that the operation will affect your dream content.
After a few weeks of experimenting with primary Tattvas, and once you
have obtained satisfactory results with Astral Projection, you can move on to
the Spiritual Alchemy Program I devised for the more ambitious aspirants of
this work. This advanced Tattva operation will provide optimal results when
exploring the Elements, Sub-Elements, and their corresponding Chakras. It
follows the sequence of entering the layers of the Aura from the Lower Astral
(Earth) to Higher Astral (Water), followed by Lower Mental (Air), onto
Higher Mental (Fire), and finally to the Spiritual Plane (Spirit).
I am presenting the Western sequence of the emanating Elements, which
puts the Fire Element after the Air Element, instead of before, as the Eastern
system. In my experience, this sequence of progressively working with the
Cosmic Planes from the lowest to the highest is most effective in Spiritual
Healing and raising the vibration of consciousness.
The entire Spiritual Alchemy Program with the Tattvas will take you
one month to complete. Afterwards, you can either repeat the cycle or work
with individual Elements and Sub-Elements to master those parts of the Self.
You can also revisit specific Cosmic Planes you found most exciting and
revelatory that either called to you or that you felt needed further exploration.

Working with the Tattvas is an excellent opportunity to use a Magickal
Journal, a notebook or a diary to record your experiences. This is essential to
improving your scrying abilities and memory recall and to give you insight
into particular symbols, numbers, and events you experienced during a
session. By documenting your experiences over time, you will begin to
recognize patterns and derive metaphoric meanings from your sessions that
are part of a larger picture of who you are and what you need to work on to
further your Spiritual Evolution.
In conclusion, remember to be patient, determined, and persistent with
this work, especially when starting out. It is easy to get deterred from the
Astral Projection component of this practice when you are not getting the
results you anticipate. However, keep in mind that developing inner
clairvoyance is no easy task. Tattva Scrying is hard, strenuous work that
often takes months or even years to become proficient. But with
perseverance, your visions will grow from vague, slightly indistinguishable
pictures to vivid, dynamic, and powerful Magickal experiences.
Spiritual Alchemy Program with the Tattvas
Lower Astral Plane—Earth/Muladhara:
Day 1—Earth/Primary Earth
Day 2—Earth/Earth of Earth
Day 3—Earth/Water of Earth
Day 4—Earth/Air of Earth
Day 5—Earth/Fire of Earth
Day 6—Earth/Spirit of Earth
Higher Astral Plane—Water/Swadhisthana:
Day 7—Water/Primary Water
Day 8—Water/Earth of Water
Day 9—Water/Water of Water
Day 10—Water/Air of Water
Day 11—Water/Fire of Water
Day 12—Water/Spirit of Water
Lower Mental Plane—Air/Anahata:
Day 13—Air/Primary Air

Day 14—Air/Earth of Air
Day 15—Air/Water of Air
Day 16—Air/Air of Air
Day 17—Air/Fire of Air
Day 18—Air/Spirit of Air
Higher Mental Plane—Fire/Manipura:
Day 19—Fire/Primary Fire
Day 20—Fire/Earth of Fire
Day 21—Fire/Water of Fire
Day 22—Fire/Air of Fire
Day 23—Fire/Fire of Fire
Day 24—Fire/Spirit of Fire
Spiritual Plane—Spirit/Vishuddhi, Ajna, Sahasrara:
Day 25—Spirit/Primary Spirit
Day 26—Spirit/Earth of Spirit
Day 27—Spirit/Water of Spirit
Day 28—Spirit/Air of Spirit
Day 29—Spirit/Fire of Spirit
Day 30—Spirit/Spirit of Spirit

PART VI:
THE SCIENCE OF
YOGA (WITH
AYURVEDA)

THE PURPOSE OF YOGA
Yoga is a group of physical, mental, and Spiritual practices, disciplines,
and techniques that originated in Ancient India approximately 5000 years
ago. Yoga was mentioned in the ancient Hindu texts, The Rig Veda and The
Upanishads, although its actual development only occurred in the fifth and
sixth centuries BC. The Yoga Sutras of Patanjali, the most influential Hindu
text on Yoga, is dated around the second century BC. In the 20th century,
this text was translated into English, which sparked a strong interest in Yoga
in the Western world.
Although most people in the West believe that Yoga is a mere physical
exercise consisting of bodily postures (Asanas), this could not be further
from the truth. Asanas are the physical aspects of what is a profound science
of unfolding the Spiritual potential of human beings. There was very little
Asana practice as part of Yoga in the olden days. Its original forms were
mostly of a transcendental and meditative nature. Yoga used to be about
accessing states of pure consciousness and bliss (Samadhi) and overcoming
the burdens of the material reality. Asana practice, which is the core of
Hatha Yoga, came out of Tantra approximately 1000 years ago.
The word "yoga" in Sanskrit means "union," and it refers to the union
of the individual consciousness with the Cosmic Consciousness. For there to
be a union between the two, though, there must first have been a separation.
In reality, there never was. Separation is an illusion that occurs through the
mind with the birth and growth of the Ego. Yoga then aims to transcend the
Ego and become a Self-realized human being. By practising a time-tested
system of working with their energy field, an individual can overcome the
limitations of their mind and reach the highest of their Spiritual potential.
According to Patanjali, Yoga requires the cessation of the mind's
fluctuations, which results in the union of the observer, observing, and
observed. The ultimate purpose of Yoga is Enlightenment and the integration
of the Spirit within the body. To get its practitioners there, Yoga aims to
balance the energetic system and gradually awaken the Kundalini at the base
of the spine. Once Kundalini Shakti rises up the spinal column to meet Shiva
at the Crown, a Divine Marriage occurs, expanding the individual
consciousness. When the two opposing masculine and feminine forces
become one, The Soul is released from the body and exalted over the Ego.

The individual becomes a Yogi or liberated Soul, a God-man. They
transcend duality and the Elements within themselves, represented by the
lower Cosmic Planes, and attune their consciousness to the Spiritual Plane
which is Non-Dual.
Because Yoga is our most ancient method of balancing the energetic
system and awakening the Kundalini energy, I have decided to dedicate a
whole chapter to its science. Although this section is a mere primer on Yoga,
there is much to be gained from the practices presented herein, and they
form part of the Eastern Spiritual system.

Types of Yoga
The practice of Yoga is very diverse, as there are many different
branches. All of them are ultimately meant to lead to the experience of union
with the Godhead. Below are the main branches of Yoga, although there are
many more that are not listed here. Some of those are considered part of the
main ones, although unique in and of themselves.
Hatha Yoga Tantra emerged around the sixth to eighth centuries AD,
and it is its historical development in practice that later generated Hatha
Yoga (14th century). Hatha Yoga is the type that is generally practised in
Western society. There are slight variations in philosophies, practices, and
terminology that allow the different schools of Yoga in the West to fit the
individual practitioners, but they all include the practice of Asanas (physical
postures) and Pranayama (known as breathing techniques but more
accurately designed for the expansion of Prana).
The word "Hatha" is translated from Sanskrit to mean "Sun and Moon,"
with "ha" indicating Sun energy, while "tha" signifies Moon energy. Hatha
Yoga means the harmony or balance between the Sun and Moon, Pingala,
and Ida Nadis, two opposite and complementary aspects of our Being. Hatha
Yoga's higher purpose is optimizing one's health by purifying the energetic
channels in the body and maximizing the function of the Chakras. It attempts
to harmonize the physical body so that it can be transcended. Hatha Yoga
also gives one control over their internal states so that they gain better
awareness and concentration for the purpose of developing and refining the
meditative practices of Yoga, termed Dharana and Dhyana. Meditation is a
crucial component in all Spiritual practices, including Yoga.

Mudras and Bandhas are also classified as part of Hatha Yoga. Mudras
are physical gestures or body positions that induce psychological and mental
changes in one's Being. Bandhas are physical energy locks that perform the
same function as Mudras. Bandhas are primarily used to pierce the Three
Granthis, or psychic knots, that lie along the Sushumna Nadi. The ultimate
goal of Hatha Yoga is awakening the Kundalini and reaching Samadhi.
There are many methods and techniques in Hatha Yoga to accomplish this
goal. Many of these are presented in this work.
Kundalini Yoga The system of Yoga focused on awakening the
Chakric centres to induce a higher state of consciousness. Kundalini Yoga
involves repetitive movements of the body, synchronized with the breath,
coupled with chanting and meditation. It is meant to keep the mind busy by
combining several Yogic practices simultaneously. Kundalini Yoga’s
ultimate goal is to awaken the Kundalini energy at the base of the spine,
which activates the Major Chakras on its upward rise. Its discipline involves
simple Asanas, which allows the practitioner to focus on their energy and
have optimal awareness of their body and mind. Kundalini Yoga includes
specific techniques from Kriya Yoga, Hatha Yoga, Bhakti Yoga, Raja Yoga,
and Shakti Yoga.
Karma Yoga The "Yoga of Action." Karma Yoga is the system of
attaining Self-awareness through activity. Its ideals are altruistic as it
involves selfless service to others as part of one's larger Self, void of
attachment to results—the individual aims to align their willpower with the
Will of God. As such, all of their actions are performed from a higher sense
of consciousness. Karma Yoga involves being involved in the present
moment, which allows one to transcend the Ego. It aids in making the mind
more calm and peaceful by overcoming personal emotions. Since Karma
Yoga is more of a way of life than anything else, there have been many
notable individuals in the past who were Karma Yogis, even unknowingly.
Jesus Christ, Krishna, Mahatma Gandhi, Mother Teresa, Rumi, are just a few
examples.
Mantra Yoga The "Yoga of Sound." Sound vibrations have an
incredible effect on the mind, body, and Soul, and they can also produce a
change in the material world. Mantra Yoga uses the power of sound to
induce different states of consciousness through the process of repetition of

certain Universal sounds, which becomes a Mantra. These Universal sounds
are to be vibrated or "chanted" with our vocal cords for added effect.
Mantras are found in every tradition and often include the names and powers
of Gods, Goddesses, Spirits, and other Deities. Using Mantras
invokes/evokes energy into the Aura, which affects one's consciousness.
Many Mantras aim at producing mental and emotional tranquillity, thereby
raising awareness of the inner processes of the mind. The name itself,
"Mantra," means to "transcend the working mind." There are three ways to
chant Mantras: Bhaikari (Normal audible intonation—voiced), Upanshu
(Soft audible intonation—Whispering), and Manasik (Not audible—
silently/mentally). Mantra Yoga is a powerful method of introspection as
well as aligning one's consciousness with Divine forces. Through it, the
ultimate aim of Yoga (union with the Godhead) can be achieved.
Jnana (Gyana) Yoga The Yoga or path of Self-inquiry, also known as
the path of Intuitive Knowledge. Although many people think that Jnana
Yoga is the path of the intellect, perception is predominantly through the
Vijnanamaya Kosha (the intuitive mind) and not the Manomaya Kosha (the
rational intellect), which is the direct experience of the Divine and develops
Gnosis. Jnana Yoga aims to develop an awareness of one's Higher Self to
achieve illuminative knowledge of the mysteries of the Universe. It seeks to
discern between Maya (illusion) and the real world of the Spirit. Jnana
Yoga's components include the study of sacred texts, introspection,
philosophical discussions, and debates. Notable Jnana Yogis include Swami
Vivekananda, Sri Yukteswar Giri (Yogananda’s Guru) and Ramana
Maharshi, to name a few. Some of the Greek philosophers, including
Socrates and Plato, were also Jnana Yogis.
Bhakti Yoga The Yoga of devotion. Bhakti Yoga focuses the love of
the Divine through devotional rituals. Examples of practices involved in
Bhakti Yoga are prayer, chanting, dancing, singing, ceremony and
celebrations. The emotions are given an outlet instead of suppressing or
dissipating them in different directions. By becoming wholly absorbed in
their object of devotion, the Bhakti transcends their Ego. As the lower
emotions are diminished, the mental problems disappear. As such, one's
concentration and awareness increases, leading to Self-realization.
Raja Yoga

The Yoga of introspection through meditation. Raja Yoga is the Royal
Path as "raja" means king. It encompasses the essence of many other Yoga
paths, namely Karma, Bhakti, and Jnana Yoga. Raja Yoga's focus is the
internal analysis of the workings of the mind for the sake of quieting it and
going beyond it. It attempts to transcend the Ego and the outer environment
of the physical body and attune to the inner Self of the Soul and Spirit. It is
the path towards Enlightenment.
Patanjali Yoga Patanjali Yoga is often identified with Raja Yoga
directly because it is introspective. The system of Patanjali consists of eight
limbs (Sanskrit term "Ashtanga") or steps of Yoga (Figure 84), which the
individual must master on their path to Self-realization. Think of the eight
limbs as parts of the great tree of Yoga where each limb (branch) connects to
the trunk. Each limb has leaves that express its life and are the techniques of
the science of Yoga. The eight limbs or steps of Yoga are outlined in the
Yoga Sutras, which was compiled by the Sage Patanjali. They are Yamas
(Self-restraints), Niyamas (Self-observances), Asana (postures), Pranayama
(breathing), Pratyahara (withdrawal of the senses), Dharana (concentration),
Dhyana (meditation), and Samadhi (Self-identification with the Cosmic
Consciousness).

Figure 84: The Eight Limbs of Yoga
Kriya Yoga The Sanskrit word "kriya" means "action" or movement."
Kriya Yoga is the science of controlling the Prana in the body. One of its
aims is to decarbonize the human blood and recharge it with oxygen which
is meant to rejuvenate the brain and spinal centres. The Ancient system of
Kriya Yoga consists of many levels of Pranayama, Mantra, and Mudra,
based on techniques intended to rapidly accelerate your Spiritual Evolution
and lead to communion with one's Higher, God-Self. Kriya Yoga gained

popularity in the world through Paramahamsa Yogananda’s book
Autobiography of a Yogi.
Dhyana Yoga The Yoga of meditation. Dhyana Yoga primarily
involves the seventh limb of Yoga mentioned in the Yoga Sutras of
Patanjali. It concerns itself with quieting the mind and enabling greater
focus and awareness, which is achieved through the practices of Asana,
Pranayama, Mantra, and Dharana (concentration). Dhyana Yoga trains you
to keep your mind off the unnecessary things in life and concentrate on what
matters. Meditation cuts through illusion, leading to the truth of reality,
enabling Self-knowledge.

***
In conclusion, many other forms of Yoga are excellent systems in and
of themselves, but that fall within one of the primary groups mentioned.
They include Siddha Yoga, Shiva Yoga, Buddhi Yoga, Sannyasa Yoga, Maha
Yoga, and others. Since there are many styles or types of Yoga, each slightly
different from the other, the average person has many options to choose from
that best suits their psychological and physical makeup. However, most
types of Yoga include the same elements and practices, which I will examine
in detail in this section.

THE FIVE KOSHAS
According to Yoga and Ayurveda, the human energy system is
comprised of five Subtle Bodies or "sheaths," called the Koshas (Figure 85),
which cover and hide our essential nature—Atman, the Universal Self
(Soul). The Koshas are essentially the gateways to the Soul. They account
for the different dimensions and vibratory states of consciousness that
humans partake of. The Koshas relate to the Five Elements (Tattvas) and the
Seven Major Chakras, with the highest Kosha (Anandamaya) encompassing
the three Spirit Chakras. (Note that Figure 85 is an abstract schematic of the
Five Koshas, not their actual depiction in the Aura.)
The Koshas are synonymous with the Subtle Bodies of the inner
Cosmic Planes of the Western Mystery Tradition. However, instead of seven,
there are five layers of the Aura in the Yogic system, which are
interconnected, constantly interacting with one another. The Koshas emanate
in sequence, starting with the densest, with each subsequent layer being
more subtle and higher in vibration than the one that came before it.
Annamaya Kosha
The first layer or sheath is called Annamaya Kosha, and it relates to the
conscious mind and the physical body. It is the grossest and most dense
Kosha and one with which we identify the most. Built up by the food we eat,
Annamaya Kosha corresponds with the first Chakra, Muladhara, and the
Earth Element (Prithivi Tattva). Regular Asana practice and a healthy diet
can keep our physical body in optimal condition so that we can experience
life free of disease.
Pranamaya Kosha
The second sheath is Pranamaya Kosha; the vital energy body made up
of Life energy. Pranamaya Kosha, as the name says, deals with the Prana in
the body; hence it can be termed our Pranic Body, which is absorbed through
the breath, food, and the Universal Life Force that surrounds us, permeating
our Aura. It flows through the intricate system of Nadis in the body, of
which it is said there are Seventy-Two Thousand. Pranamaya Kosha can be
controlled by the breath, although it is more subtle of a force than the air we

breathe. It relates to the second Chakra, Swadhisthana, and the Water
Element (Apas Tattva). Pranamaya Kosha links Annamaya and Manomaya
Koshas as it relates to both the body and the mind. The practice of
Pranayama aids in keeping the Life Force flowing freely in Pranamaya
Kosha, keeping the body and mind healthy.

Figure 85: The Five Koshas
Manomaya Kosha

The third sheath is Manomaya Kosha, the mental/emotional body in the
Yogic system, related to the subconscious mind. Manomaya Kosha includes
thought patterns and feelings, permeating the vital and food sheaths. It
corresponds with the third Chakra, Manipura, and the Fire Element (Tejas
Tattva). Becoming aware of our daily thoughts and emotions and dissolving
them through sense-withdrawal (Pratyahara) and one-pointed concentration
(Dharana) can help keep our mind pure and unburdened by the pain of
duality.
Vijnanamaya Kosha
The fourth sheath is Vijnanamaya Kosha, and it is the psychic or higher
mental body that enables intuition. In Yoga, Vijnanamaya Kosha is the
"wisdom body" that reveals personal insights. It links the subconscious and
the unconscious minds, giving us inner knowledge, including gut reactions
to life events. Vijnanamaya Kosha relates to the fourth Chakra, Anahata, and
the Air Element (Vayu Tattva). Through the practice of Yamas (Selfrestraints) and Niyamas (Self-observances), and with the use of Yogic
practices, we can purify our minds and hearts to connect with our intuition,
enabling us to live a happier and more Spiritual life.
Anandamaya Kosha
Lastly, the fifth sheath is Anandamaya Kosha, which is considered as
the transcendental or bliss body, the Body of Light. Its experience can be
described as a state of total absorption into a blissful state, achieved through
the silence of the mind. The sweetness and beauty of life we experience
when the mind is still is known as Sat-Chit-Ananda (Truth-ConsciousnessBliss in Sanskrit), the subjective experience of the ultimate unchanging
reality—Brahman.
Ananadamaya Kosha can be experienced through daily meditation
(Dhyana) or via a full Kundalini awakening. Although Anandamaya Kosha
allows us to experience the super-conscious state of Samadhi, there still
exists the duality between subject and object. Therefore, to become one with
Brahman (The All), we need to reach the layer above Ananadamaya Kosha,
the nameless Divine layer.
In The Upanishads, Anandamaya Kosha is known as the Causal Body.
It relates to the unconscious mind, a reservoir of feelings, thoughts,
memories, and urges outside of our conscious and subconscious awareness.
The unconscious mind controls many of the automatic processes in the body

that ensure our physical survival. Anandamaya Kosha corresponds with the
Spirit Element (Akasha Tattva) and the three highest Chakras of Vishuddhi,
Ajna, and Sahasrara. It is the state of consciousness where our Holy
Guardian Angel, our Higher Self, resides.

The Subtle Bodies in the East and West
The Five Koshas of the Eastern Spiritual system of Yoga correspond
with the Subtle Bodies of the inner Cosmic Planes of the Western Esoteric
System: the Physical, Astral, Mental, and Spiritual, with the Astral and
Mental containing the Lower and Higher aspects. However, one minor
difference between the two systems requires our attention.
In the science and philosophy of Yoga, the Subtle Bodies emanate with
respect to the sequence of the first five Major Chakras, starting with
Muladhara and ending with Vishuddhi. As mentioned, the three Spirit
Chakras are attributed one Auric layer, for a total of Five Koshas. In
contrast, the Western Mystery Tradition, whose foundation is the Qabalistic
Tree of Life, follows the sequence of emanation of the Divine Light of Ain
Soph Aur (Limitless Light) as pertains to the Five Elements. In the Qabalah,
the Divine Light manifests as Spirit, Fire, Air, Water, Earth, where each of
the subsequent Elements is less in Spiritual quality than the one before it.
As you can see, the two systems are almost identical concerning this
subject, with one exception. In Yoga, the Fire (Manomaya Kosha) and Air
(Vijnanamaya Kosha) Elements are interchanged since Manipura Chakra is
below Anahata in the Chakric system. In Qabalistic philosophy, Fire is the
first Element that manifested out of Spirit and is higher in Spiritual quality
than the Air Element, irrespective of its positioning on the Chakric system.
Western Mystery Schools teach that willpower (Fire) is higher than thought
(Air) in the process of manifestation.
Both Spiritual systems give compelling arguments regarding this
subject. The Western system argues that our Word, which links us with the
Creator, is motioned by willpower. Its medium of expression is the mind
(thoughts), but its impetus is a Force projected from the Soul deep within.
The Soul is a Fire, and its origin is our Sun (Sol).
Theosophists, who belong to the Western Mystery Tradition, refer to the
Plane of the Soul as the Buddhic Plane, which they position between the
Mental and Spiritual Planes. To it, they attribute the Fire Element.
Theosophists were heavily influenced by Hermeticism and its branch of

Alchemy, the latter of which was impacted by the works of Plato and
Aristotle. Therefore, the Theosophists adopted the Eastern Chakric system
but modified it according to their psychic experiences of the Subtle Planes.
In their view, Spiritual Alchemy clearly defines the Fire Element as higher in
Spiritual quality than the Air Element.
Although Air is more subtle than Fire, since it is invisible like the
Spirit, Hermeticists believe that the Air Element vibrates between the Fire
and Water Elements since both partake of it and require it for sustenance.
According to its placement on the Chakric system, the Air Element emanates
from the Spirit. Still, its positioning in the expression of the subtle energy in
our Aura would be between the Higher Mental Plane (Fire) and Higher
Astral Plane (Water). For this reason, the Air Element is used more by the
Ego, while the Soul uses the Fire Element to express itself.
The Ego also uses the Fire Element, but it filters through the mind,
partaking in duality. The Fire Element, though, reaches into Non-Duality of
the Spirit, as it reconciles all opposites within itself in the same way as
combustion, Fire in its physical state, consumes all things. For this reason,
Fire is the Element of action since it bypasses the mind and deals strictly
with applying willpower.
Willpower does require imagination, however, which in the Qabalah is
related to the Tiphareth Sephira, located between the Heart and Solar Plexus
centres and corresponding with the Air Element. You see then that according
to Qabalistic philosophy, both the emotions (Water) and willpower (Fire)
require Air (thoughts) to manifest. They both partake of it, which is why in
the Cosmic Planes model, its energetic sheath or Subtle Body lies between
the two instead of above them.
Another argument for Qabalistic philosophy is that, according to their
Four Worlds (YHVH) model, the Fire Element is Atziluth, the highest of the
worlds. This world relates to Archetypes as the highest Plane below Spirit,
while the Air Element is the third World (Yetzirah), relating to the visual
images our minds form. According to Qabalists, Atziluth (Fire) is formless,
while Yetzirah (Air) does have form.
The Fire Element is responsible for abstract thinking, while the Air
Element is responsible for logical or rational thinking. Abstract thoughts
exhibit higher intelligence than logical thoughts. For example, the Ego uses
logic and reason to relate to the world around it, where its primary impetus is
survival and the fear of death. On the other hand, the Soul uses abstract

thinking as well as what we call intuition, which is an internal recognition of
truth in reality. We don't know how or why we know what we know, but we
are confident that we know it.
Abstract thinking and intuition are motivated by unconditional love,
which is an expression of the Fire Element acting on the Water Element. For
this reason, when we experience love in our hearts, there is a warmth that
accompanies it. And according to most world religions and philosophies, the
highest conception of God-the Creator for humanity is unconditional love.
Hence, the highest of the four lower Elements, and one closest to God, is the
Fire Element and not the Air Element.
Although I am a Qabalist first Yogi second, my thoughts naturally align
with the Western Mystery Tradition, as do my beliefs. Ceremonial Magick,
the Spiritual practice of the Western Mysteries, has provided me with direct
experience of the Elemental energies for many years, and I have witnessed
firsthand the Qabalistic system's accuracy. Likewise, my experiences with
Enochian Magick, especially the Thirty Aethyrs operation that
systematically enters the Aura layers, have given me Gnostic insight that
validates and supports the Western Tradition’s claims about the Elements in
terms of Spiritual progression.
Regardless, I must remain respectful to the Yogi who has practised the
Eastern Spiritual system for 20-plus years, who may also feel the same sense
of certainty concerning its validity. The emanation of the Eastern Tattvas, for
example, follows the Earth, Water, Fire, Air, Spirit sequence. And in the
explanations of the Tattvas and how each manifested into existence, it is
evident that the Air Element is more etheric and therefore less dense than the
Fire Element. It is invisible to the senses, while Fire is visible as combustion
or flame. Also, one cannot negate the sequence of manifestation of the
Chakras, their correspondences, and their locations in the body. Thus, I
recognize that arguments can be made for Western and Eastern systems
concerning this subject.
Does the Subtle Body related to the Fire Element come before the
Subtle Body associated with the Air Element or after it? We can debate this
topic ad nauseam and won't get anywhere because both the Eastern and
Western systems make valid claims from their respective viewpoints. But
since Serpent Rising is my brainchild and I can only speak about the things I
have experienced to be accurate, its philosophy concerning the emanation

and the sequence of the Cosmic Planes will remain aligned with the
Qabalistic system until I am convinced otherwise.

ASANA
According to the Yoga Sutras of Patanjali, Asana is defined as "that
position which is steady and comfortable." In Sanskrit, the word "asana"
means "sitting down," a sitting posture, or meditation seat. Its most literal
meaning is "posture," whether a sitting or standing posture. For this reason,
Asanas are called "Yoga poses" or "Yoga postures" in English.
Asana aims to develop the ability to sit or stand comfortably in one
position for an extended period. The purpose of Asana is to influence,
integrate, and harmonize all levels of one's Being, including physical,
mental, emotional, and Spiritual. Although it may seem at first that Asanas
are concerned mainly with the physical body, they have profound effects at
every level of Being if one practices awareness during the process.
Asana is one of the eight limbs of Yoga. On a subtle level, Asanas are
used to open energy channels and psychic centres. Their use facilitates the
free-flow of Prana through the Nadis of the Subtle Bodies, thereby
stimulating the Chakras and the Kundalini energy. As such, Asanas aid
considerably in the Spiritual Evolution of an individual. One of its more
immediate results is an improvement in one's flexibility and strength and the
reduction of stress and the mental and emotional conditions that relate to it.
By developing control over the body, one gains control over the mind
as well—As Above, So Below. Thus, the practice of Asanas integrates and
harmonizes the physical body and the mind. It releases tensions or knots in
both. Mental stresses are released by dealing with them on the physical level
through holding the physical postures. Physical tension, such as muscular
knots, is eliminated as well, thereby restoring the health of the body. After
just one Yoga Asana session, the practitioner has more vitality, vigour and
strength, while the mind is more joyful, creative, and inspired.
The 15th century Hatha Yoga Pradipika, the central text of Hatha Yoga,
identifies 84 Asanas that provide both Spiritual and physical benefits.
Because of its power as a tool for developing higher awareness, the practise
of Asana is introduced first in Hatha Yoga practice, followed by Pranayama,
and then Mudras, etc. While practising Asana, the individual should always
breathe through the nose unless they are given specific instructions to do
otherwise. The breath should always be coordinated with the Asana practice.

It has been proven that the practice of Yogic postures (Asanas) increase
the feel-good chemicals in the brain, such as serotonin, dopamine, and
endorphins. As the stress hormone cortisol decreases, mental relaxation is
restored, and awareness and focus are heightened. By combining physical
exercise and meditation, the body's metabolism becomes balanced. The
practice of Asanas strengthens and tones the muscles resulting in not only
feeling good internally but looking great on the outside.

The Three Meditation Asanas
The purpose of meditation Asanas is to allow the individual to sit for an
extended period without movement of the body or discomfort. Once the
physical body is bypassed through the application of a meditation Asana and
single-pointedness of the mind, one can experience a deeper state of
consciousness.
When you are in a meditation Asana, your spinal column should be
straight, which will allow Prana to circulate through the Nadis and Chakras
most optimally. Also, since it is easy to lose control over the muscles while
in deep meditation, it is best if the legs are immobilized in some way while
the torso makes contact with the ground.
Sukhasana, Siddhasana, and Padmasana (Figure 86) are practised most
when one wants to get into a deep meditation. These poses are the sitting
down, cross-legged Asanas that the Ancient Gods from the East are
commonly depicted in. The mechanics of each of these meditation Asanas
will be described below.
Lying down in what the Yogis refer to as Shavasana (Figure 94), the
Corpse Pose, is not recommended for meditation since there is a tendency to
drift off into sleep. Sukhasana, Siddhasana and Padmasana satisfy all the
requirements of meditation while making the individual alert and focused on
the task at hand. These three meditation Asanas also allow the bottom of the
spine to make contact with the ground, which achieves proper grounding of
one’s inner energies. As such, the chatter of the mind can be overcome.
When the practitioner can sit in a meditation Asana for a full three
hours without the body jolting or shaking, they will have achieved mastery
over it. Only then can they practise the higher stages of Pranayama and
Dhyana. It is imperative to attain a steady meditation Asana if one wants to
progress in meditation practice. The chatter of the Ego must be overcome,
and the mind calmed if the individual is to find their inner bliss.

Achieving mastery over a meditation Asana is just one part of the
process of entering deep meditation. The other part of the process is having
your eyes closed and focusing on the space between your eyebrows, which
activates the Mind’s Eye. The Mind’s Eye is the doorway or entry-point to
Sahasrara, which represents one’s higher state of consciousness. Sahasrara
is, in fact, our contact point with Cosmic Consciousness.
Before beginning with a meditation Asana, it helps to do some basic
stretching. Doing so will allow the practitioner to avoid muscle cramps and
joint pain which can deter from the task at hand. Also, it helps to avoid
meditating on a full stomach since there might be too much movement of
one’s inner energies as the food is being synthesized.

Figure 86: The Three Meditation Asanas
Sukhasana
This is the standard sitting cross-legged pose. It is called the "Easy
Pose" because everyone can do it rather effortlessly. The back is to be

straight and shoulders relaxed. The hands are placed on the knees, with the
index fingers and thumbs touching in either Jnana or Chin Mudra. (For how
to perform Jnana and Chin Mudras, see the "Mudra: Hasta (Hand Mudras)"
chapter.) When meditating, the eyes should be closed, and one should focus
on the point between the eyebrows, which is the location of the Mind’s Eye.
Although this pose is considered the easiest of the meditation Asanas, if
not done correctly, a backache can develop. It is imperative that the knees
are kept close to or on the ground and the spine straight. It is common to see
practitioners place a cushion under their buttocks for support.
Note that it is good to start your meditations with Sukhasana but not
make it your end-goal. Instead, it would be best if you progressed to being
able to accomplish Siddhasana and even Padmasana as they offer more
support for your body and are optimal for long-term meditations.
Siddhasana
As the more advanced sitting cross-legged pose, Siddhasana is
otherwise called the "Accomplished Pose." In Siddhasana, you are to tuck
your feet into your thighs (between thighs and calves), so your genitals will
be between your two heels. Your feet will be side by side, thus keeping your
knees wide apart. The back is to be straight, and the hands are to be placed
on the knees, in either Jnana or Chin Mudra. This pose is called
"Accomplished" because it is more advanced than Sukhasana, and it requires
the practitioner to be more flexible to have their hips open.
Siddhasana directs the energy from the lower Chakras upwards through
the spine, thus stimulating the brain and calming the entire nervous system.
As the lower foot is pressed against the perineum, Muladhara Chakra is
activated, enabling Mula Bandha. Also, the pressure to the pubic bone
pushes the trigger point for Swadhisthana, automatically triggering Vajroli
Mudra. These two psycho-muscular locks redirect sexual nervous impulses
back up the spine and into the brain. They give the practitioner control over
their reproductive hormones, which allows them to practise sexual
continence or abstinence. (For a description of Mula Bandha and Vajroli
Mudra, see the "Mudra: Bandha (Lock Mudras)" and "Mudra: Adhara
(Perineal Mudras)" chapters.)
Padmasana
The most advanced sitting cross-legged meditation pose, Padmasana, is
commonly referred to as the "Lotus Pose." Although you have heard the

term "Lotus Pose" frequently used in meditation circles, Padmasana is the
only correct Lotus pose, while the previous two are less advanced variations
of it. In Padmasana, you are to sit with your feet on top of your thighs,
tucked close to the hips. It is the closed-knee pose that can only be done
successfully when the hips are more open than the other two meditation
Asanas or postures. One should not attempt Padmasana until sufficient
flexibility of the knees has been developed.
Padmasana allows the body to be held entirely steady for long periods
of time. Once the body is steadied, the mind can become calm. Padmasana
directs the flow of Prana from Muladhara to Sahasrara Chakras, heightening
the experience of meditation. Applying pressure to the lower spine through
this posture has a relaxing effect on the nervous system as well. Blood
pressure is reduced, muscular tension decreases, and the breath becomes
slow and steady.

Hatha Yoga vs. Vinyasa Yoga
Hatha Yoga is an umbrella term for many of the most common forms of
Asana practice taught in the West. Hatha Yoga emphasises controlled
breathing and posture, which builds core strength while providing the
psychological benefits associated with the practice of Asanas. In Hatha
Yoga, you move your body slowly and deliberately from one posture to the
next while focusing on mindfulness and relaxation.
Vinyasa is an approach to Yoga in which you smoothly transition from
one pose into the next. There is a flow in a Vinyasa Yoga session where the
transitions are coordinated with your breathing, giving you the feeling that
your breath moves with your body. Fast-paced Vinyasa sessions are
physically challenging. They provide a cardio workout that makes you sweat
more and is more physically demanding than Hatha Yoga sessions.
Hatha and Vinyasa are two different styles or approaches to Asana
practice that incorporate the same poses and are beneficial in their own way.
While Hatha is a more static approach, Vinyasa is dynamic. Since Vinyasa
moves at a faster pace from one posture to the next, it requires more
significant breathing control than Hatha Yoga. Conversely, Hatha Yoga
allows for more stretching and meditation since the poses are held for longer.
While Hatha Yoga is better for stress reduction, Vinyasa provides a
better strength training and cardio workout. You can apply either approach to
your Asana practice to yield different results. However, for optimal results, it

would be best to determine your specific mind/body constitution, or Dosha,
to know which style is best suited for you. Guidelines for Yogic practices,
including Asanas, and to determine which of the Three Doshas is dominant
in your life are given in the chapter on Ayurveda in the latter part of this
section.

Preparing for Asana Practice
Before starting your Asana practice, set aside a specific time in the day
for its performance. For example, dawn and dusk are traditionally the best
times of the day to practise Yoga because of our body and mind’s natural
connection with the energy of the Sun. However, if you find it impossible to
practise at this time, then find another time in the day and be consistent with
it throughout the week when you are planning your Yoga sessions.
If you decide to practise Yoga in the morning so that you can prepare
your body and mind for the day, keep in mind that your muscles and bones
will be stiffer than later in the day. Therefore, exercise caution when entering
postures and don’t overexert yourself. Conversely, an evening practice
allows you to relax after completing your daily obligations. In addition, your
body is more flexible in the evenings enabling you to go deeper into your
postures with less resistance.
Find a place where you will be undisturbed for the duration of your
Asana practice. This should be an area that has an even, flat surface. Make
sure that you have enough room to move around you since many poses
require that you extend your arms and legs freely. It is best to practise
Asanas in an open environment to avoid the distraction of nearby objects.
If you are practising indoors, as most people do, ensure that the room is
well ventilated and has a comfortable room temperature. Keep in mind that
your body will generally heat up, so ensure that there is no draft, or the room
is too cold since cold air affects your muscles and joints and makes them
stiffer. For this reason, it is common for Yoga classes to be held in hot
environments but never cold ones.
Fresh air adds additional benefits to the breathing component of
performing Asanas. After all, breathing is one of the keys to successful Yoga
practice. If you are burning incense or diffusing essential oils to help elevate
the mind and attain a meditative state, make sure not to overdo it in a way
where it will interfere with the air quality and your breathing. Although

essential oils and incense have been an integral part of many Yoga classes
over the years, some practitioners avoid it since scent can be a distraction.
The same rule applies to playing music during your Yoga sessions.
Relaxing, calming music in the background can help you get in the right
mood, but it can also be distracting. If you decide to play music, make sure it
is not too loud since your focus should be on going inwards during your
practice.
As is the case with all energy invoking or manipulating practices,
including the Spiritual Healing modalities in this book, avoid practising
Yoga on a full stomach. In other words, give yourself at least an hour after a
snack or two to three hours after a heavy meal before starting your Yoga
practice. After your practice, it is advisable to drink a protein shake or have a
complete, well-balanced meal so that your muscles can begin to repair
themselves. You can also drink a meal-replacement smoothie to bring
nutritious elements into your body.
Make sure to have a water bottle handy to avoid becoming dehydrated.
It is advisable to avoid drinking water during the Asana practice to avoid
losing concentration, but if you find yourself thirsty, you may do so. After
all, being dehydrated can be more distracting than taking a few sips of water.
However, it is best to drink water before and after the Yoga session.
You should wear loose, comfortable, light clothing made of natural
fibres like cotton. Your clothing should not restrict your movements.
Remove any jewellery and ornaments and take off your shoes and socks
since Yoga is practised with bare feet. Also, please turn off your phone and
place it away from you to avoid distractions.
Lastly, get a Yoga mat that provides padding and a non-slip surface to
practise on. Your Yoga mat will become your unique ritualistic item that will
contain your energy, so make sure not to share it with others. Get a cushion
and keep it handy if you need extra support while engaging in meditation
Asanas. Meditation Asanas are prerequisites for most other Yogic practices
like Pranayama, Mudra, Mantra, and meditation.
Although the above preparation guidelines are for Asana practice, they
also apply to other Yogic practices. For a complete session that yields the
most optimal Spiritual results, you should structure your Yoga practice to
include a combination of Asanas, Pranayamas, Mudras, Mantras, and
meditation.

Tips for Your Asana Practice
Before starting your Asana practice, you should do a basic warm-up to
prepare the body for physical activity and prevent injury risk. Begin by
rolling your joints in a circular fashion for a few minutes, clockwise and
counterclockwise, to awaken your body and provide natural lubrication for
better mobility. You can perform head, wrist, ankle, and shoulder rolls on the
ground while sitting on your mat. Then, stand up on your mat and transition
into arm, leg, and lower back rolls.
Next, you should do some basic stretches for a few more minutes to
ensure that you don’t pull a muscle during your practice. Start by stretching
your back while standing up. Then, as you sit back down, transition into the
shoulder, arm, leg, and head stretches. Your entire warm-up should take five
to seven minutes.
Begin and end every Asana practice by lying in Shavasana, the Corpse
Pose. For example, you can do a shorter Shavasana to start and a longer one
when you finish your Asana sequence. When you begin with your Asanas,
keep in mind always to move from one posture to the next calmly and
deliberately. As you do so, coordinate your breath so that you inhale as you
move into an Asana and exhale as you move out of it.
Although there are mixed thoughts on this point, there is no definitive
amount of time that an Asana should be applied. You should hold it as long
as it is comfortable and does not cause pain or discomfort. Get a good stretch
and work whatever part of the body the Asana targets. As a beginner, don’t
overexert yourself but gradually increase the duration with time. For
example, you can start with 20-60 second intervals while practising deep
breathing. The average time for optimal results is about one to three minutes
per Asana.
To prevent back injury, practice an equal number of Asanas that bend
the back forwards as those that bend it backwards. If your back becomes
tight, or if pain develops in your back, especially your lower back, you can
assume the Balasana (Child’s Pose) to get relief. Also, when you feel tired or
weak during your Asana practice, lie in Shavasana or Balasana for a short
time to get some rest. You can then resume your practice.
Remember to perform all Asanas slowly and with control. You will
progress much faster in your Yoga practice if you take things slow while
concentrating on breathing and mindfulness. Also, learn to let go of any
tension, stress, or negative thoughts. The key to unlocking the power of

Yoga in your life is to be consistent and determined in your practice while
exhibiting patience by not expecting instant results. Listen to your body and
let it guide you by never forcing things. Finally, have fun and enjoy the
process. Yoga will bring more happiness to your life if you let it.

Beginner Asanas

Figure 87: Beginner Asanas (Part I)

Figure 88: Beginner Asanas (Part II)

Figure 89: Beginner Asanas (Part III)

Intermediate Asanas

Figure 90: Intermediate Asanas (Part I)

Figure 91: Intermediate Asanas (Part II)

Advanced Asanas

Figure 92: Advanced Asanas (Part I)

Figure 93: Advanced Asanas (Part II)

PRANAYAMA
Pranayama is a term used for various breathing techniques that work
with Pranic energy in the body. It consists of two words, "prana" and
"ayama." Prana is the vital energy or Life Force that is in constant motion
and which exists in every animate and inanimate thing in the Universe.
Although it is closely related to the air we breathe, Prana is more subtle than
mere oxygen, though we as human beings can manipulate it through
breathing techniques.
"Ayama" means "extension" or "expansion." The word "Pranayama"
then can be said to imply the "extension or expansion of Prana." The essence
or purpose of Pranayama is to utilize breathing methods to influence the
flow of Prana throughout the various Nadis in the Body of Light. As the
movement of Prana in the Light Body Body is increased, the function of the
Chakras is optimized.
Both Yoga and Tantra say that the basis of existence depends on the
forces of Shiva (consciousness) and Shakti (energy). Ultimately, instead of
two, there is only one force, as Shakti is the creative force or energy of
Shiva. Shakti is also a direct reference to one's Kundalini energy which is
sublimated Prana. The ultimate purpose of Hatha Yoga is to realize Shiva or
Cosmic Consciousness through the manipulation of one's Shakti. Raising the
Kundalini energy to the Crown Chakra is the goal of all human beings,
which is synonymous with Shakti and Shiva becoming One in a Divine
Marriage at the Crown.
Pranayama is considered as one of the eight limbs of Yoga. In Hatha
Yoga, Pranayama commences once the individual has regulated the body
through the practice of Asana and a moderate diet. Eating is a direct means
of obtaining Prana in the body. All foods contain different Pranic vibrations,
and the quality of the food we eat has an immediate effect on our body and
mind.
The practice of Pranayama works primarily with the vital energy body,
otherwise known as the Pranamaya Kosha, along the Astral Plane. It directly
affects the Five Prana Vayus, which, in turn, affect the Nadis and the
Chakras. The mind follows the breath while the body follows the mind. By

controlling the energy body through the breath, we gain control over our
minds and physical bodies—As Above, So Below.
Pranayama is beneficial in regulating brain waves and calming the mind
and emotions. Through Pranayama, we can still our minds and create a
meditative state of consciousness that will give us mental clarity and
enhance concentration and focus. It is for this reason that breathing
techniques are a prerequisite in most ritual work.
Pranic energy provides vitality to all systems that support our
consciousness. By increasing the storehouse of Prana in the body through
breathing methods, our mind is elevated, and we can achieve higher
vibratory states of consciousness. Its more physical goals are to aid in the
recovery from illness and to maintain our health and well-being.

Pranayama Exercises
Natural Breathing
Natural breathing is essentially the awareness of the breath. It is the
most basic Pranayama exercise that introduces practitioners to their
breathing patterns and respiratory system. Being aware of the process of
breathing is enough to slow down the respiratory rate and initiate a calmer
rhythm. It is relaxing for the mind and will put one into a meditative state.
Natural Breathing can be practised at any time, irrespective of where you are
and what you are doing.

Figure 94: Shavasana
To begin the exercise, sit in a comfortable meditation Asana or lie in
Shavasana (Figure 94). Close your eyes and allow your body to relax. Go
within your mind and become aware of your natural breathing. Feel the

breath flowing in and out of your nose while keeping your mouth closed the
whole time. Notice if the breath is shallow or deep, and examine whether
you are breathing out of your chest or stomach. Notice if there is any sound
when you are breathing and become aware of its temperature as it is going in
and out. The breath should be cooler on the inhale and hotter on the exhale.
Be aware that the lungs expand and contract as you breathe. Notice the
effect your breathing pattern has on your body and if it is causing any strain.
Observe its rhythm with complete detachment. The key to this exercise is
awareness and attention. Do not try to control your breath in any way but
develop total and absolute awareness of it by going inwards. Perform this
exercise for as long as you want. Then, end it by bringing your awareness
back to your entire body and opening your eyes.
Abdominal/Diaphragmatic Breathing
Abdominal breathing is the most natural and efficient way to breathe.
Utilizing it and making it a natural part of your daily life will improve your
physical and mental well-being. The purpose of Abdominal or
Diaphragmatic Breathing is to increase the use of the diaphragm and
decrease the use of the ribcage.
The diaphragm is a thin skeletal muscle located at the base of the chest
that separates the abdomen from the chest. During inhalation, the diaphragm
moves downward, which pushes air into the abdomen, thereby expanding it.
During exhalation, the diaphragm moves upwards as air is emptied from the
abdomen, contracting it in the process. The lungs naturally inflate and
deflate on the inhale and exhale as well.

Figure 95: Abdominal/Diaphragmatic Breathing
To begin, sit in a comfortable meditation Asana or lie in Shavasana to
relax the body. Close your eyes and get into a calm, meditative state. Place
the right hand on the abdomen just above the navel, while placing the left
hand over the centre of your chest. Observe your natural breathing without
trying to control it in any way. Notice if you breathe out of your chest or
belly.
Now take control over the breathing process by inhaling deeply through
the nose and sending the breath into your abdomen, making it expand
outward. As you exhale through the nose, your abdomen moves downward
until the air is emptied from it (Figure 95). Feel as though you are trying to
breathe through the navel alone.
All the movement should be in your right hand, as it moves up with
inhalation and down with exhalation. Your left hand should remain unmoved
since you are trying to not involve the ribs in the breathing process. Repeat
the inhalation and exhalation while breathing slowly and deeply. When
expanding the abdomen, do so comfortably without causing any strain on the
body.

Perform this exercise as long as you want, with a minimum of a few
minutes. Once you are ready to end it, bring your awareness back to your
physical body and open your eyes.
Note that Diaphragmatic Breathing increases the use of the lower lobes
of the lungs, improving their efficiency and providing a positive effect on the
heart, stomach, liver and intestines. People who breathe through the
diaphragm are less prone to stress and anxiety and have better overall mental
health. As such, make all efforts to make this type of breathing a regular part
of your life.
Thoracic Breathing
Thoracic breathing employs the middle lobes of the lungs by expanding
and contracting the ribcage. This type of breathing expends more energy
than Abdominal breathing but brings oxygen quicker into the body. As such,
it is the preferred breathing method when performing physical exercise or
dealing with stressful situations.
Many people who are prone to anxiety have made Thoracic breathing a
regular part of their life. However, breathing this way in tense situations
perpetuates stress further since negative energy does not neutralize or
"ground" itself in the abdomen. As mentioned, Abdominal or Diaphragmatic
breathing is the most optimal method of breathing naturally. If one begins
Thoracic breathing, they need to make a conscious effort to switch back to
Abdominal breathing soon after to preserve and conserve their vital energy
and keep their mind balanced.
To begin the exercise, sit in a comfortable meditation Asana or lie in
Shavasana. Close your eyes and get into a calm, relaxed state. Place your
right hand on the abdomen just above the navel while placing your left hand
over the centre of your chest. Become aware of your natural breathing
pattern without trying to control it at first. Notice which hand is moving up
and down as you breathe.
Discontinue using the diaphragm now and begin to inhale by expanding
the ribcage slowly. Draw the air into the lungs and feel them as they inflate
and widen. Expand your chest as much as is possible, comfortably. Now
exhale slowly and draw the air out of your lungs without causing any strain
on your body. Your left hand should move up and down on this motion while
your right hand remains unmoved.
Repeat the inhale again by expanding your ribcage, being mindful not
to utilize the diaphragm whatsoever. Control the breathing process by

making sure that only your left hand is moving. Continue Thoracic breathing
for as long as you want, with a minimum of a few minutes. Notice how
breathing in this way makes you feel and the thoughts that enter your mind.
Once you are ready to end the exercise, bring your awareness back to your
physical body and open your eyes.
Clavicular Breathing
Clavicular Breathing follows Thoracic breathing and can be done in
combination with it in periods of significant stress or strong physical
exertion. If someone is experiencing obstructive airways, such as under an
asthmatic attack, they tend to breathe in this way. Clavicular Breathing
allows maximum ribcage expansion on inhalation, bringing the most air into
the lungs.
Clavicular Breathing is performed using the sternum and neck and
throat muscles to pull the upper ribs and collar bone upwards, engaging the
upper lobes of the lungs. We can combine this breathing technique with
Thoracic and Abdominal Breathing to form Yogic Breathing.
Lie in Shavasana or sit in a comfortable meditation Asana to begin the
exercise. The body should be relaxed, as with all Pranayama exercises. Close
your eyes and get into a meditative state, becoming aware of your natural
breathing pattern. Next, perform Thoracic Breathing for a few minutes. Take
another breath into the chest; only this time inhale a little more until an
expansion is felt in the upper portion of the lungs. Notice the shoulders and
collar bone moving up slightly. Exhale slowly by relaxing the neck and
upper chest first, followed by bringing the ribcage back to its original state
as air completely expels out of your lungs.
Repeat this exercise as many times as you want, with a minimum of a
few minutes. Observe the effects on the body of this type of breathing
technique. When you are ready to complete the exercise, bring your
awareness back to your physical body and open your eyes.
Yogic Breathing
Yogic Breathing combines the previous three breathing techniques to
maximize oxygen intake and to balance the Elements within. It is commonly
known as the "Three-Part Breath" because it involves the abdomen, chest,
and clavicular region for maximum inhalation and exhalation (Figure 96).
Yogic Breathing greatly benefits the vital organs and Chakras that can
become constricted or stagnant with physical and emotional tension from

stress and anxiety. In addition, this exercise revitalizes the body, mind, and
energy system through the Pranic energy we get from the air around us.
Yogic Breathing relieves anxiety, refreshes the psyche, and activates the
Parasympathetic Nervous System to bring about a calmer, more balanced
state of consciousness. As such, this exercise should be practised often, for
at least ten minutes at a time, preferably on an empty stomach. Yogic
Breathing is recommended before and during more advanced Pranayama
techniques and to correct poor breathing habits.

Figure 96: Yogic Breathing (Three-Part Breath)
To begin the exercise, sit in a comfortable meditation Asana or lie in
Shavasana. Inhale slowly and deeply, allowing the abdomen to expand fully.
When the belly cannot receive any more air, extend the chest outwards and
upwards next. After the lower and middle portions of the lungs have
maximized their air intake, inhale a little more so that the collar bones and
shoulders move up slightly, filling up the upper lobes of the lungs. There

will be some tension in the neck muscles while the rest of the body should
remain relaxed.
The sequence is to be reversed on the exhale; the collar bones and
shoulders move downward first, freeing air out of the upper chest, followed
by the ribs contracting in the mid-torso. Finally, the breath is released from
the lower abdomen as the belly contracts and draws inwards towards the
spine. One round of Yogic Breathing includes one complete inhalation and
exhalation.
The inhale and exhale should be one fluid, continuous movement
without any transition points unless you practise rhythmic breathing, such as
the Four-Fold Breath, where you pause on the in and out breaths. At no point
in time should the Yogic Breathing exercise cause any strain on the body.
After repeated Yogic Breathing cycles, you will notice that Abdominal
breathing takes in approximately 70% of the breath. The more you practise
Yogic Breathing, you will adjust your natural breathing to utilize your
abdomen most constructively and alleviate stress. Practise the Yogic
Breathing technique for as long as you want; when you are ready to
complete the exercise, bring your awareness back to your physical body and
open your eyes.
Note that the primary requirement of all Pranayama exercises is for
respiration to be comfortable and relaxed. Any strain on the body brings
agitation in the mind. Once awareness and control over the breathing process
have been established in the Yogic Breathing method, the Clavicular
technique is abandoned while emphasis is placed on Abdominal and
Thoracic breathing. This alteration makes the Yogic Breathing method more
natural in filling up the abdomen and lungs with air without causing any
strain on the body.
Sama Vritti (Four-Fold Breath)
Sama Vritti (Sanskrit for "equal breathing") is a powerful relaxation
exercise that allows individuals to clear their minds, relax the body, and
enhance focus. It utilizes equal ratio breathing, where the inhalation
(Puraka), internal retention (Antara Khumbaka), exhalation (Rechaka), and
external retention (Bahya Khumbaka) are all the same length. Sama Vritti
promotes mental balance by activating the Parasympathetic Nervous system,
alleviating stress, and raising consciousness.
Otherwise known as the Four-Fold Breath, Sama Vritti is the
foundational breathing technique in The Magus, a prerequisite for meditation

and Ceremonial Magick ritual work. It calms down the individual within
minutes and shifts their consciousness into the Alpha State, activating the
higher brain centres. It has been my primary breathing technique for over
sixteen years and one that I teach to all Kundalini awakened individuals.
The Four-Fold Breath should be performed with Yogic Breathing on the
inhale and exhale for maximum air intake. If you feel too much of a strain on
the clavicular region during the Yogic breath, just focus on Diaphragmatic
and Thoracic breathing. This exercise can be performed at any time and
anywhere. You do not need to close your eyes during the exercise, although
it helps if you are meditating or are in the midst of a healing session.
To begin the exercise, sit in a comfortable meditation Asana or lie in
Shavasana. Breathe in through your nose, slowly counting to four. Fill up
your abdomen with air first, followed by your lungs. Both should reach their
maximum air intake as you get to the four-count. Hold your breath now and
count slowly to four again. Next, begin to exhale to the count of four,
allowing your chest and abdomen to relax back to their natural state. The
exhale should be unforced and even. Hold now again to the count of four,
thereby completing the first breath cycle.
Continue the exercise for as long as you require, with a minimum of a
few minutes. The breath cycles should be continuous and smooth, without
breaks or interruptions. Repeat the exercise as many times as you need
throughout the day. It helps to perform the Four-Fold Breath before
encountering any potentially challenging situation since it optimizes your
mental and emotional state so you can perform at your highest capacity.
Anulom Vilom (Alternate Nostril Breathing)
Anulom Vilom, commonly known as Alternate Nostril Breathing,
involves inhaling through one nostril while exhaling through the other
nostril. The left nostril corresponds with the Lunar Ida Nadi, while the right
nostril relates to the Solar Pingala Nadi. Anulom Vilom purifies the Ida and
Pingala Nadis while creating a sense of well being and harmony within the
mind, body, and Soul.
Alternate Nostril Breathing stimulates the Chakras and major brain
centres to work at their optimum capacity by balancing the masculine and
feminine energies. This Pranayama technique gives vitality to the body
while clearing Pranic blockages and balancing the brain's two hemispheres.
Its regular use stimulates the Sushumna Nadi and can even cause a
Kundalini awakening.

Figure 97: Alternate Nostril Breathing
Anulom Vilom is often recommended for stress-related issues, such as
headaches or migraines. It nourishes the body through the extra supply of
oxygen, benefiting the brain and respiratory system. It also purifies the blood
of any toxins, which aids the cardiovascular and circulatory systems.

To begin the exercise, choose one of the three meditation Asanas. Keep
your spine and neck straight while closing your eyes. Next, with either your
left or right hand, make the Pranava Mudra called Vishnu Mudra, which
involves bending the index and middle fingers towards the palm (Figure 97).
While doing so, place your other hand on your knee in either Jnana or Chin
Mudra.
Pranava Mudra allows you to block one nostril with the thumb or ring
finger while breathing in through the other nostril and then alternate as you
breathe out. (When blocking with the ring finger, the little finger serves as
support.) With this method, you can go back and forth while targeting one
nostril for the inhale and the other for the exhale.
Anulom Vilom should be used in combination with Yogic Breathing on
the in and out breaths. Start by inhaling slowly to the count of four through
the left nostril while keeping the right nostril closed. Now switch and close
the left nostril while exhaling to the four-count through the right nostril.
Reverse the process now and inhale to the count of four through the
right nostril while keeping the left nostril closed. Next, switch and close the
right nostril as you exhale through the left nostril to the four-count. The first
round or cycle is now complete.
Remember to always start Anulom Vilom by inhaling with the left
nostril, which calms the inner Self, putting you in a meditative state. Keep
your inhalations and exhalations equal and in rhythm. You should not feel
any bodily strain nor be out of breath at any point.
Start with the four-count on the inhale and exhale and move on to five
and six, up to ten. The higher you can go on the count while keeping the
inhale and exhale equal, the more control you will obtain over your breath. If
you are having trouble counting to four, count to three or even two instead. I
found that the most optimal results occur with the four-count, so I always
introduce it as the baseline.
As you inhale and exhale, pay attention to the corresponding nostril and
notice the inner emotional changes as they are happening. Being mindful
during this Pranayama technique will enable you to draw the most power
from it.
A powerful and effective variation of Anulom Vilom is Nadi Shodhana,
which includes internal breath retention (Khumbaka). You can incorporate
the internal Khumbaka to hold your breath for the same count as the inhale
and exhale. You can also include the internal and external Khumbakas,

where you hold your breath after the inhale and the exhale. Think of this
second method as Samma Vritti with the addition of the Alternate Nostril
Breathing technique. Again, I suggest starting with the count of four and
moving upwards from there, all the way to ten.
Another variation of Anulom Vilom is breathing through one nostril at
a time, referred to as the Lunar Breath and Solar Breath. The Lunar Breath
involves keeping the right nostril closed and breathing out of the left nostril.
Since it is associated with the Ida Nadi and the passive Water Element, it can
be utilized to cool down the body, lower metabolism, and calm the mind.
The Lunar Breath invokes an introverted mind state, making its practice
beneficial before inner contemplation, deep meditation, and sleep.
The Solar Breath involves keeping the left nostril closed while
breathing out of the right nostril. Being associated with the Pingala Nadi and
the active Fire Element, performing the Solar Breath warms the body, raises
metabolism, and accelerates bodily activities. Since it strengthens willpower,
the Solar Breath is useful when you need to invoke concentration,
determination, and fortitude. Its use makes the individual extroverted, which
aids in work and physical activities.
Bhastrika Pranayama (Bellows Breath)
Bhastrika means "bellows" in Sanskrit, which refers to a bag-like
device with handles that blacksmiths use to blow air onto a fire to keep the
flame burning. Similarly, the Bhastrika Pranayama increases air flow in the
body, fueling the inner fire and producing heat at the physical and subtle
levels. This Pranayama technique is known to balance the Three Doshas of
Ayurveda.
Bhastrika Pranayama pumps a higher quantity of oxygen in the body,
which raises the heartbeat, increasing one’s energy levels. When done
regularly, it removes blockages from the nose and chest, including toxins
and impurities. Bhastrika helps with sinus, bronchitis, and other respiratory
issues. Since it stokes the gastric fire, it also improves appetite and digestion.
You can practise Bhastrika Pranayama with internal breath retention
(Khumbaka) to keep the body warm in cold and rainy weather.
To begin the Bhastrika Pranayama exercise, sit in one of the three
meditation Asanas. Close your eyes and relax the body while keeping your
head and spine straight. Next, place your hands on your knees in either the
Jnana or Chin Mudra.

Take a deep breath in and breathe out forcefully through the nostrils
without strain. Then, breathe in again with the same force. On the inhalation,
you should fully expand the abdomen outwards, allowing your diaphragm to
descend. On the exhalation, the abdomen pushes inwards, while the
diaphragm moves upwards. You should perform the movements with
exaggeration and vigour, which will cause a strong nasal sound.
One round of Bhastrika Pranayama equals ten cycles. Practise up to five
rounds to start while taking a deep breath in and breathing out slowly. Do
this at your own pace while always keeping the force of inhalation and
exhalation equal. If you feel dizzy, slow it down to a more comfortable pace.
When you gain some proficiency in the exercise, gradually increase the
speed while keeping the breath rhythmical.
Bhastrika Pranayama reduces the level of carbon dioxide in the blood,
which balances and strengthens the nervous system, inducing peace of mind
and energetic tranquillity. It is an excellent exercise to prepare one for
meditation.
A variation of this exercise is Kapalbhati Pranayama, a Yogic breathing
technique that is considered a Kriya, or internal purification practice
(Shatkarma). Kapalbhati comes from the Sanskrit root words "kapal,"
meaning "skull," and "bhati," meaning "shining." Therefore, it is called the
"Skull Shining Breath" in English. This Pranayama technique is meant to
cleanse all parts of the skull and head through strong air exhalations,
improving one’s clarity of mind and focus while sharpening the intellect.
Unlike Bhastrika, Kapalbhati involves force only on the exhale while
keeping the inhale a natural, passive process. While Bhastrika engages the
chest and lungs, Kapalbhati only engages the abdominal muscles. Kapalbhati
Pranayama reverses the normal breathing process, which involves active
inhalation and passive exhalation. This Pranayama technique is known to
have profound effects on the nervous system. Many Yogis also practise it to
clear the Nadis.
Since Bhastrika is the more advanced of the two Pranayama techniques,
it is wise to begin with Kapalbhati and transition into Bhastrika. Both have
similar effects on the body and mind. You can also practise internal and
external retention (Khumbaka) with both exercises for added benefits.
Ujjayi Pranayama (Ocean Breath)
Ujjayi Pranayama is a soft, whispering breath, often called the Ocean
Breath, as it resembles the sound of the waves coming to shore. Its other

name is the Victorious Breath since Ujjayi in Sanskrit means "one who is
victorious." The Ujjayi technique allows us to become victorious in
Pranayama by constricting the breath to make its distribution into the
targeted areas easier. It builds a soothing internal heat while calming the
mind and nervous system. This Pranayama technique has a profoundly
relaxing effect on a psychic level since it mimics deep sleep breathing.
With Ujjayi Pranayama, you are to breathe in and out of the nose with
the lips closed while contracting the glottis inside the throat to produce a
soft, snoring sound. The glottis is the middle part of the larynx where the
vocal cords are located that expands with forced respiration and closes when
you are speaking. The glottis should contract but not close all the way so that
it feels like you are breathing out of a drinking straw in your throat (Figure
98). You will feel the breath stroke the back of your throat on the inhale and
exhale.

Figure 98: Ujjayi Pranayama (Glottis Position)
Ujjayi Pranayama’s breathing should be slow, calm, and deep. You
should implement Yogic Breathing on the inhale and exhale for maximum
air intake. (The diaphragm should control the length and speed of the
breath.) The inhalations and exhalations should be equal in duration without
causing any strain on the body. While practising Ujjayi, focus on the sound
produced by the breath in the throat, which should only be audible to you.
Start the exercise with ten to fifteen breaths and slowly increase to five
minutes for optimal effects. As you get some experience with Ujjayi
Pranayama, you may integrate Khechari Mudra for added benefits. (For the
Khechari Mudra technique, refer to the "Lalana Chakra and Amrita Nectar"
chapter in this section.) Khechari Mudra can be practised independently or
as part of Asanas and advanced Pranayama techniques.
Bhramari Pranayama (Humming Bee Breath)
Bhramari Pranayama derives its name from the Indian black bee called
Bhramari since the exhalation of this Pranayama resembles the typical
humming sound. The humming sound vibrations have a natural calming
effect on the nerves and psyche, making this Pranayama technique excellent
for alleviating mental tension, stress, anxiety, and anger. Its performance
strengthens the throat and voice box and is beneficial for the Thyroid Gland
and overcoming any physical issues related to it.
Bhramari Pranayama stimulates the Parasympathetic Nervous System,
inducing muscular relaxation and lowering blood pressure. Its health benefits
make it advantageous to perform before sleep since it helps with insomnia.
Begin the exercise by sitting in one of the three meditation Asanas.
Keep the spine straight and close your eyes. Place both hands on your knees
in either Jnana or Chin Mudra while allowing your body and mind to relax.
Bring the awareness to the centre of the forehead, where Ajna Chakra is
located. While performing the exercise, be mindful to keep your attention in
this area. You will find that with repeated use, the Bhramari Pranayama
increases psychic sensitivity and awareness of subtle vibrations, which is
helpful for deep meditation.
Next, raise your arms while bending the elbows and bringing your
hands to the ears. Use the index finger on each hand to plug your earholes or
press against the ear flaps without inserting the fingers (Figure 99). You

should block out all outside sounds, which allows you to focus entirely on
your interior.
Take a moment now to listen to the sound of silence within you while
keeping your breathing steady. Before starting the controlled breathing
method, close your lips while keeping your teeth separated slightly, which
will allow the sound vibration to be heard and felt more inside of you.
Inhale slowly and deeply through the nose. On the exhalation, make a
deep "mmmm" sound, resembling the humming sound of a bee. Your exhale
should be longer than the inhale with a continuous, smooth, and even sound
vibration. You should feel the vibration strongly inside your mouth and
larynx, which has a soothing effect on the brain. The first round is now
complete.
Continue the exercise for as long as you want with a minimum of a few
minutes while practising Yogic Breathing throughout for maximum air
intake. Observe the effects of the exercise on the body and mind. When you
are ready to end Bhramari Pranayama, bring your awareness back to your
physical body and open your eyes.

Figure 99: Humming Bee Breath
Sheetali Pranayama (Cooling Breath)
In Sanskrit, the word "Sheetali" roughly translates as "that which has a
soothing or cooling effect." Sheetali Pranayama or Cooling Breath is a
Pranayama technique that calms down the mind and body with the
performance of a powerful cooling mechanism on inhalation.

Sheetali Pranayama is especially beneficial in the summertime when we
feel an excess of the Pitta’s main qualities. Hot weather produces hot flashes,
fevers, skin conditions, inflammation, acid indigestion, high blood pressure,
general agitation due to heat, and overall physical exertion, which throw the
mind-body out of balance. Sheetali Pranayama aids in the adverse effects of
hot weather by releasing body heat, harmonizing Pitta’s qualities and leaving
the body and mind feeling calm, cool and relaxed.
To begin the Pranayama exercise, sit in one of the three meditation
Asanas. Close your eyes and relax the whole body while keeping your spine
straight. Place your hands on your knees in either the Jnana or Chin Mudra.
Open your mouth and extend the tongue as far out as it can go, curling
the sides of it towards the centre to form a tube. Purse your lips to hold the
tongue in this position (Figure 100). Practise a long, smooth, controlled
inhalation through the rolled tongue. After the inhalation, draw the tongue
while closing the mouth and exhale through the nose. The first round is now
complete.

Figure 100: Sheetali Pranayama
Continue the exercise for as long as you want with a minimum of a few
minutes. Observe its effects on the body and mind while paying particular

attention to the tongue and the sound and cooling sensation of the inhaled
breath. Remember to practise Yogic Breathing throughout the exercise.
When you are ready to end Sheetali Pranayama, bring your awareness back
to your physical body and open your eyes.
The in-breath should produce a sucking sound with a cooling sensation
on the tongue and roof of the mouth. Although you should begin with an
equal ratio of in and out breaths, as you get more advanced with Sheetali
Pranayama, the duration of the inhalation should gradually become longer to
increase the cooling effect.
The Cooling Breath effectively restores temperature balance after
practising Asanas or other Yogic practices that heat the body. As such, you
should make it a part of your daily practice, especially during the summer
months.
Sheetkari Pranayama (Hissing Breath)
In Sanskrit, the word "Sheetkari" implies a form of breathing that
produces the "shee" (hissing) sound; hence it is often referred to as the
Hissing Breath. Just like Sheetali Pranayama, this exercise is designed to
cool down the body and mind. The only difference between them is that in
Sheetali, you inhale through a folded tongue, while in Sheetkari, you inhale
through closed teeth. As with Sheetali Pranayama, Sheetkari is quite
beneficial in hot weather and to restore temperature balance after heating the
body via physical exercise.

Figure 101: Sheetkari Pranayama
To begin Sheetkari Pranayama, sit in one of the three meditation Asanas
and close your eyes. Keep your spine straight, and body relaxed while
placing your hands on your knees in either the Jnana or Chin Mudra. Hold
the teeth lightly together without strain on your jaw. The lips should be
separated, thus exposing the teeth (Figure 101). Keep your tongue flat
against the soft palate in your mouth, or even perform Khechari Mudra.
Inhale slowly and deeply through your teeth. At the end of the
inhalation, close your mouth and exhale through the nose in a controlled

fashion. The first round is now complete. Remember to practise Yogic
Breathing throughout the exercise. The in and out breaths should be slow
and relaxed. Be mindful of the cooling sensation on your teeth and inside
your mouth and the hissing sound produced. Perform the exercise for as long
as you want, with a minimum of a few minutes. When you are ready to end
Sheetkari Pranayama, bring your awareness back to your physical body and
open your eyes.
This Pranayama technique and the previous one can be used to control
hunger or thirst since bringing in cool air satisfies the body. Both exercises
allow Prana to flow more freely through the body, relaxing the muscles and,
consequently, emotions. Both cooling practices balance the endocrine system
and purify the blood of toxicity. Finally, both exercises are helpful before
going to sleep or in cases of insomnia.
Avoid Sheetali and Sheetkari Pranayamas if you have low blood
pressure, asthma, respiratory ailments, or excessive mucous, as with a cold
or flu. Due to the cooling effect on the body, avoid both exercises in cold
climates or if you are experiencing general cold sensitivity. With Sheetkari
Pranayama, avoid if you have problems with your teeth or gums.
Moorcha Pranayama (Swooning Breath)
The word Moorcha in Sanskrit means "fainting" or "loss of sensation."
Moorcha Pranayama’s other name is the Swooning Breath, referring to the
dizziness one experiences while performing this exercise. Moorcha
Pranayama is an advanced technique that should be practised only by those
individuals who have developed mastery over the previous Pranayama
exercises. When it is performed correctly, the individual can experience
intense and prolonged periods of inner bliss that accompany being semiconscious.
There are two methods of practising Moorcha Pranayama; in the first,
you are to lean your head slightly back, while in the second, you are to rest
your chin on the base of your throat (Jalandhara Bandha). In both methods,
you are to practise internal breath retention (Khumbaka) while gazing at the
centre between the eyebrows where the Mind’s Eye tunnel is located
(Shambhavi Mudra). Doing so induces the void mind-state while the
connection with Ajna chakra allows you to experience deep, contemplative
thoughts.
One of the reasons that the individual becomes lightheaded while
performing Moorcha Pranayama is the reduction of oxygen supply to the

brain during extended breath retention. Another reason is the pressure they
put on the blood vessels in the neck, which cause fluctuations in the pressure
within the skull. Finally, the carotid artery gets continually compressed,
which further induces a swooning sensation.
Moorcha Pranayama can be performed at any given time during the
day, as is the case with all Pranayama exercises. However, it is most
effective early in the morning and in the evening when the Ego is least
active. Overcoming the Ego’s hold over the consciousness is crucial in
facilitating the desired effect of this exercise. The sensation of near-fainting
can be so powerful that it makes you feel entirely out of your body, like you
are floating in space.
Overcoming the boundaries of the physical body allows us to separate
from the Ego in consciousness and feel the rapture of Spiritual awareness.
Moorcha Pranayama helps alleviate stress, anxiety, anger, and neuroses
while raising the level of Prana in the body. This exercise is highly
recommended for people who want to awaken their Kundalini energy. It
allows them to understand the Oneness that Out-of-Body Experiences can
bring, connecting them with Sahasrara Chakra.
To begin the exercise, sit in one of the three meditation Asanas while
keeping your head and spine straight. Place your hands on your knees in
either the Jnana or Chin Mudra while relaxing the body. Some people like to
hold their knees instead of adopting Jnana or Chin Mudras. Doing so allows
them to press on their knees while locking their elbows when they lean their
head back or forward, giving them better support during this crucial part of
the exercise. You may try both options and see what works best for you.
Method#1
With eyes open, focus on the space between your eyebrows. Take in a
few deep and slow breaths to calm down the mind. Perform Khechari
Mudra, then slowly inhale through both nostrils with Ujjayi Pranayama as
you gently bend the head back (Figure 102). Hold your breath now for as
long as you can without strain while maintaining eyebrow centre gazing the
entire time. You should feel slight dizziness as you hold your breath. Exhale
slowly now while bringing the head back to its upright position. Close your
eyes and relax for a few seconds. Allow yourself to experience the lightness
and tranquillity in the mind and body. The first round is now complete.

Figure 102: Moorcha Pranayama (Method#1)
Method#2
Focus your eyes on the space between the eyebrows while taking a few
deep breaths to calm down your interior. Implement Khechari Mudra, then
slowly inhale through both nostrils with Ujjayi Pranayama as you gradually
bend your head forward until your chin touches your throat cavity (Figure
103). Pause your breathing for as long as you can without tension while

allowing yourself to become united with the Mind’s Eye. Hold this position
until you begin to feel a loss of consciousness. Exhale slowly now while
returning your head to its upright position. Close your eyes and relax for a
few seconds while allowing yourself to experience the intense feeling of
nonexistence brought on by near-fainting. This completes the first round.
Repeat the breathing pattern in either method as many times as you are
comfortable. It helps to start with 5-10 breaths and move on to 15-20 as you
get more familiar with the exercise. Remember always to discontinue the
practice as soon as the fainting sensation is felt. The goal is to induce a
swooning sensation, not to lose consciousness entirely.

Figure 103: Moorcha Pranayama (Method#2)
As a final note, you can combine Method#1 and Method#2 in the same
practice where on the first breath, you perform one method while on the
second breath, you perform the other one. Before doing so, however, please
spend some time getting familiar and comfortable with both techniques
separately.

THE THREE GRANTHIS
Granthi is a Sanskrit term that means "doubt" or "knot," more
explicitly meaning "a difficult knot to untie." This term is often used in
Yogic literature, referring to psychic knots which block the flow of Pranic
energy in the Sushumna Nadi. In Kundalini Yoga, there are Three Granthis
which are obstacles on the path of the awakened Kundalini. These Granthis
are called Brahma, Vishnu, and Rudra (Figure 104).
The Three Granthis represent levels of awareness where the power of
Maya or illusion (concerning our ignorance of the Spiritual reality and
attachment to the material world) are particularly strong. For you to awaken
all the Chakras and raise the Kundalini to the Crown, you must transcend
these barriers. Our limiting beliefs, personality traits, desires, and fears
result from us being entangled by the Granthis.
The Three Granthis are obstacles on our path to higher knowledge and
Spiritual Evolution. They obscure the truth of our essential nature.
However, by applying knowledge and Spiritual practices, we can untie the
knots and transcend their restrictions.
In Yoga, there are various ways to untie the Granthis. Bandhas
(energetic locks) of Hatha Yoga aid the flow of Prana and can also be used
to overcome the Three Granthis. (I will discuss Bandhas in the following
chapter on Mudras.) Bandhas block off energy flow to a specific body area,
causing the energy to flood more strongly when the Bandha is released.
Bandhas are powerful tools that we can use to raise the Kundalini energy to
Sahasrara Chakra by overcoming the Three Granthis along the way.
Brahma Granthi
Commonly referred to as the Perineal Knot, Brahma Granthi operates
in the region between Muladhara and Swadhisthana Chakras, along the
Sushumna Nadi. This first knot is caused by anxiety about survival, the urge
to procreate, instinctive tendencies, lack of grounding or stability, and the
fear of death. Brahma Granthi creates an attachment to physical pleasures,
material objects as well as Ego selfishness. It binds us to the ensnaring
power of Tamas—inertia, inactivity, lethargy, and ignorance.
Tamas, meaning "darkness," is one of the Three Gunas found at the
core of Hindu philosophy and psychology. Yogic texts consider the Three

Gunas-Tamas, Rajas, and Sattva, to be the essential qualities of nature.
They are present in every individual but vary in degree. Brahma Granthi
can be transcended through the Mula Bandha, the "Root Lock." When
Brahma Granthi is pierced by the Kundalini on its upwards rise, the
instinctual patterns of the personality are overcome, resulting in the Soul's
liberation from the described attachments.

Figure 104: The Three Granthis
Vishnu Granthi and the Void
Although its placement is higher than the navel region, Vishnu Granthi
is referred to as the Navel Knot. It functions in the area between Manipura
and Anahata Chakras, along the Sushumna Nadi. This Granthi is caused by
clinging to the Ego and seeking personal power. Pride, as well as an
emotional attachment to people and outcomes, also causes this knot. Vishnu
Granthi is connected with Rajas—the tendency towards passion,
assertiveness, and ambition. These are all negative expressions of the
Manipura Chakra related to the improper use of willpower. The willpower
must serve the Higher Self instead of the Ego for Vishnu Granthi to be
untied.
A Void surrounds the second and third Chakra called the "Sea of
Illusion." Within this Void are found our negative behavioural patterns
resulting from outside influences, including the Karmic effects of the
Planetary and Zodiacal forces. Hara, the Navel Chakra, creates the Void and
the ball of Life energy it generates, which is our gateway into the Astral
Plane. Karmic forces affect us through the Astral Plane, which binds our
Ego to the lower Chakras surrounding the Hara centre. As such, our Ego
becomes entangled in the Sea of Illusion, blocking the vision of our true
Spiritual nature.
Overcoming the Vishnu Granthi takes our awareness out of the Void
and into our hearts, wherein lies the true Self, the Eternal Spirit. It allows us
to experience unconditional love in Anahata Chakra and the higher Spirit
Chakras of Vishuddhi and Ajna. Untying the Vishnu Granthi makes the
individual a Master of the Self, and all the innate Laws of nature are
awakened within them. Such a person becomes honest and truthful in all

their expressions. Their charisma heightens naturally, which makes them
great leaders of humanity.
To transcend the Vishnu Granthi, one must surrender to the energy of
unconditional love. True discrimination, knowledge, and faith in the unity
of all things in the Cosmos allow one to raise their consciousness to the
higher Spheres and transcend the Ego's limitations as well as its desire for
power. The performance of Uddiyana Bandha, the "Abdominal Lock," aids
in untying the Vishnu Granthi.
Rudra Granthi
Referred to as the Shiva Granthi ("Knot of Shiva") or the "forehead
knot," Rudra Granthi functions in the region between Ajna and Sahasrara
Chakras. This knot is caused by attachment to Siddhis (psychic powers), the
separateness of Self from the rest of the world, and dualistic thinking.
Rudra Granthi is connected with Sattva—the inclination towards purity,
wholesomeness, and virtue. One must surrender their Ego and transcend
duality to untie this knot. To do so, they must become virtuous and pure in
mind, body and Soul, wholly devoting themselves to God-the Creator.
We must see that Siddhis are just an expression of our connection with
the Universal Mind and not something to be gained for personal use. When
we attach ourselves to Siddhis, we bring them down to the material world
level. Instead, we should be detached, allowing Siddhis to merely express
through us without attempting to control the process. When we pierce the
Rudra Granthi, Ego consciousness is left behind, and the truth of Oneness is
revealed. Jalandhara Bandha, the "Throat Lock," can be applied to untie this
knot so that we can transition to a higher level of consciousness.

***
Once the Kundalini has been awakened in Muladhara Chakra, and for
it to complete its journey and pierce Sahasrara, all Three Granthis must be
unlocked. If there is a blockage along Sushumna Nadi, it is usually in the
area of one of the Three Granthis. By untying them through the application
of willpower and pure thoughts, or with the use of energetic locks
(Bandhas), the Kundalini can rise to Sahasrara. As such, the individual
consciousness will unite with Cosmic Consciousness as the two become
One. This transformation is permanent, and the individual will no longer be
bound by the Granthis for the duration of their life here on Earth.

MUDRA
We often see visual depictions of Ancient Gods and Goddesses from the
Eastern part of the world sitting in meditation and holding their hands in certain
positions. These hand gestures are called Mudras. They are esoteric hand gestures
that activate a specific power within us through the manipulation of energy.
Performing a Mudra, we are also directly communicating to Deities and aligning
ourselves with their energies or powers.
There are over 500 different Mudras in existence. Mudras are used crossculturally in many Spiritual systems but especially in Hinduism, Jainism, and
Buddhism. In Sanskrit, Mudra means "seal," "mark," or "gesture." Mudras are
essentially psychic, emotional, devotional and aesthetic gestures that link the
individual Pranic force with the Universal Cosmic force. Performing a Mudra
alters one's mood, attitude, and perception while deepening awareness and
concentration.
Although most Mudras are simple hand positions or gestures, a particular
Mudra may involve the whole body. Hatha Yoga Mudras, for example, use a
combination of Yogic techniques such as Asana (body positions), Pranayama
(breathing techniques), Bandha, and visualization meditations. They involve the
performance of internal actions that engage the pelvic floor, throat, eyes, tongue,
diaphragm, anus, genitals, abdomen, or other parts of the body.
Hatha Yoga Mudras are geared towards particular Yogic aims, including
affecting Prana's flow to awaken the Kundalini, facilitating the piercing of the
Three Granthis by the Kundalini, directly activating the Bindu, utilizing the
Amrita or Ambrosia nectar dripping from the Bindu, or reaching transcendence or
Enlightenment. Examples of Hatha Yoga Mudras are Khechari Mudra,
Shambhavi Mudra, Nasikagra Drishti, Vajroli Mudra, Maha Mudra, and Viparita
Karani.
Hatha Yoga Pradipika and other Yogic texts consider Mudras to be an
independent branch of Yoga which is only introduced after some proficiency has
been attained in Asana, Pranayama, and Bandha. They are higher practices that
can lead to the optimization of the Chakras, Nadis, and even awakening
Kundalini Shakti. When performed through dedicated practice, Mudras can
bestow psychic powers (Siddhis) on the practitioner.
Mudra practice is meant to create a direct link between Annamaya Kosha
(Physical Body), Pranamaya Kosha (Astral Body) and Manomaya Kosha (Mental
Body). It is meant to assimilate and balance the first three Chakras of Muladhara,

Swadhisthana, and Manipura and allow for an opening of the fourth Chakra,
Anahata, and beyond.
I have grouped the different types of Mudras into the Hand, Head, Postural,
Bandhas (energy locks), and Perineal Mudras. Hasta (Hand Mudras) are
meditative Mudras that redirect the Prana emitted by the hands back to the body,
generating an energy loop that moves from the brain to the hands and back. Their
performance allows us to connect with Archetypal powers within our
subconscious mind.
Mana (Head Mudras) are powerful gestures that utilize the eyes, ears, nose,
tongue, and lips. They are significant in meditation because of their power to
awaken major brain centres and their corresponding Chakras, and access higher
states of consciousness.
Kaya (Postural Mudras) are specific physical postures that are to be
performed with controlled breathing and concentration. Their use allows us to
channel Prana to particular areas of the body and stimulate the Chakras.
Bandha (Lock Mudras) combine Mudra and Bandha to charge the system
with Prana and prepare it for a Kundalini awakening. They also allow us to
ensure that the Kundalini pierces the Three Granthis when awakened. Bandhas
are closely related to nerve plexuses and endocrine glands which relate to
Chakras. Lastly, Adhara (Perineal Mudras) redirect Prana from the lower body
centres to the brain. They also allow us to sublimate our sexual energy located in
the groin area and lower abdomen and utilize it for Spiritual awakening purposes.

Hasta (Hand Mudras)
Hasta (Hand Mudras) allow us to direct and seal Pranic energy into specific
channels in the Aura. Since most of the major Nadis either start or finish in the
hands or feet, Hasta (Hand Mudras) are particularly effective in cleansing these
subtle channels of impurities and removing obstructions, facilitating a free flow
of energy. Their regular use promotes physical, mental, and emotional healing,
furthering our Spiritual Evolution journey.
As each finger relates to a Chakra, you influence the corresponding Chakras
by positioning the fingers in specific ways. The Palm Chakra also serves as an
interface between the Heart Chakra and the Chakras above and below it. As such,
Hand Mudras not only affect the flow of Prana in the Aura, but they allow us to
tap into Anahata's healing energy and distribute it to Chakras that require
cleansing.
Since there are five fingers and Five Elements, there is a correspondence
between them (Figure 105). For example, the thumb relates to Fire (Agni), the
index finger to Air (Vayu), the middle finger to Spirit or Space (Akasha), the ring
finger to Earth (Prithivi), and the little finger to Water (Jal). The two passive

Elements of Water and Earth and the two active Elements of Fire and Air are
reconciled by the central Spirit Element.

Figure 105: The Fingers and the Five Elements
You will notice that the thumb is most often used in Hand Mudras, which
has more Pranic currents running through it than the other fingers. Relating to
Manipura Chakra and the Fire Element, the thumb fires up and activates all the
other Elements and Chakras. In Ayurveda, where these correspondences come
from, the thumb is said to stimulate Pitta Dosha, the energy responsible for
transformation. Manipura is also the Seat of the Soul, and so when the thumb is
involved in a Hand Mudra, the Soul is the guiding force that enacts change.
There are five primary finger and hand positions to be aware of when
implementing a Hand Mudra. The first position involves joining your thumb to a
fingertip, which stimulates stability in the associated Element. The second
position involves touching the back of a finger on the nail or knuckle, which
decreases the related Element's influence. In the third position, you are to bring
the thumb to the finger's base, which also stimulates the corresponding Element.
Next, depending on the Mudra you are activating, when your palm faces outward,
you open yourself to receiving energy. When your palm faces downward,
however, you are grounding yourself.
Because they are simple to perform, Hand Mudras can be practised at any
time, whether at home or on the go. Yogis often perform Hand Mudras as part of
meditation practice, before or after other techniques such as Asanas, Pranayamas,
or Bandhas.

Steps for Performing Hand Mudras
When doing Hand Mudras, make sure your hands are clean. Since these are
Divine gestures designed to connect you with higher powers, cleanliness is
crucial. You can practise Hand Mudras while standing, kneeling, lying down, or
sitting in a chair. However, you should sit in a comfortable meditation Asana and
keep your back and head straight for optimal results. In addition, the hands and
arms should remain relaxed during the entire practice. Hand Mudras are generally
performed at the level of the navel, the heart, or placed on the knees while in a
meditation Asana.
Start by rubbing your hands together gently for seven to ten seconds to
charge them with Pranic energy. Next, place your right hand on your Hara Chakra
and your left hand on top of the right. You will begin to feel a warm energy flow
generated in Hara, your body's Pranic centre. Stay in this position for a minute or
so to obtain the necessary connection.
Always perform each Mudra one at a time, allotting the required amount of
time for each one. Remember that the outcome is cumulative, so the longer you
do a Mudra, the greater the effect on your energy. To manage chronic issues, hold
one Mudra daily for forty-five minutes or three fifteen-minute periods.
When performing a Mudra, don't exert any pressure but merely connect the
hands and fingers in the required manner to manipulate the desired energy flow.
Also, perform each Mudra with both hands since doing so promotes harmony and
balance while maximizing the desired effect. Finally, it is ideal to practise Hand
Mudras on an empty stomach, as is the case with all energy
invoking/manipulating techniques.

Jnana Mudra
Jnana Mudra is one of the most widely used Hand Mudras, especially during
meditation practice. Its name is derived from the Sanskrit "jnana," meaning
"wisdom" or "knowledge." The knowledge being referred to is the enlightened
wisdom the Yogi seeks to attain in the Yogic path.
To perform this Mudra, touch the tip of the index finger and thumb together,
thereby forming a circle, while the remaining three fingers are extended and kept
straight (Figure 106). A variation of Jnana Mudra is to tuck in the index finger
under the tip of the thumb. The front of the hand should rest on the thighs or
knees, with the palm facing downwards.
According to Ayurveda, Jnana Mudra balances the Elements of Fire (Agnithumb) and Air (Vayu-index finger) within the body. As such, practising this
Mudra during meditation stabilizes the mind while promoting concentration and
facilitating higher states of consciousness.
There is further symbolism in the practice of Jnana Mudra across various
Spiritual traditions such as Hinduism, Buddhism, and Yoga. The thumb is
believed to symbolize the Supreme Soul, or universal consciousness (Brahman),
while the index finger represents the individual Soul, the Jivatma. By connecting
the thumb and index finger, we are uniting these two realities. The remaining
three fingers, however, represent the three qualities (Gunas) of nature—Rajas
(middle finger), Sattva (ring finger), and Tamas (little finger). For consciousness
to advance from ignorance to knowledge, we must transcend these states.
By connecting the index finger to the thumb, we produce a circuit that
redirects Pranic energy through the body, sending it up to the brain instead of
releasing it into the environment. Since Jnana Mudra points to the Earth, the
effect is grounding to one’s energy, calming the mind while soothing the
emotions. This Mudra is also known to improve memory.

Figure 106: Jnana Mudra

Chin Mudra
Chin means "consciousness" in Sanskrit, and this Mudra is often referred to
as the "psychic Mudra of consciousness." Chin Mudra is otherwise known as
Gyan Mudra. ("Gyan" is Sanskrit for "knowledge" or "wisdom".) Chin Mudra is
to be performed in the same way as Jnana Mudra, the only difference being that
the palm faces upwards instead of downwards (Figure 107) so that the back of the
hand can rest on the thighs or knees.
Since they are almost identical, the symbolic elements of Chin Mudra are the
same as in Jnana Mudra. As Chin Mudra points to the Heavens above, the
upward-facing position of the hand opens up the chest, making the practitioner
receptive to energies from the Higher Planes. As such, Chin Mudra boosts
intuition and creativity while relieving stress and tension and improving
concentration. It is also helpful in overcoming insomnia.
Both Jnana and Chin Mudras facilitate going inwards, a prerequisite for deep
meditation and reaching higher states of consciousness. In addition to their use in
meditation, Jnana and Chin Mudras can be used to enhance the effects of Mantra
chanting and other Yogic practices like Asanas, Pranayamas, and Bandhas.
As a final note, it is not uncommon for Yoga practitioners to perform Jnana
Mudra on one hand while performing Chin Mudra on the other. Doing so enables
one to receive energy from a higher source while at the same time grounding the
experience.

Figure 107: Chin Mudra

Hridaya Mudra
Hridaya means "Heart" in Sanskrit, as this Mudra improves the heart's
vitality by increasing the flow of Prana. Hridaya Mudra is known to have the
ability to save a person from a heart attack by reducing chest pain instantly and
removing blockages within the arteries. It is also known as "Mrit Sanjeevani," a
Sanskrit term implying that this Mudra has the power to snatch us back from the
jaws of death.
Hridaya Mudra is also called Apana Vayu Mudra because it combines two
Mudras—Apana and Vayu. To assume the Mudra, fold the index finger and press
on the knuckle with the thumb (Vayu Mudra), which reduces the Air Element's
influence, relaxing the body and mind. Then, you are to join the thumb tip with
the middle and ring fingers (Apana Mudra), thus activating the Spirit, Earth, and
Fire Elements (Figure 108).
As Vayu Mudra cures heart irregularities, including rapid heartbeats and
perspiration, Apana Mudra reduces excess gas from the stomach while promoting
blood circulation to the heart. Acidity and heartburn are also relieved with the
performance of Hridaya Mudra.
Since the heart is the centre of emotions, Hridaya Mudra also helps release
pent-up feelings that cause stress and anxiety. As such, it is beneficial to practise
this Mudra during emotional conflict and crisis. Another common benefit of
Hridaya Mudra is overcoming sleep issues, such as insomnia. Hridaya Mudra can
be done for ten to fifteen minutes at a time or longer and repeated as often as
necessary.

Figure 108: Hridaya Mudra

Shunya Mudra
Shunya means "emptiness," "spaciousness," or "openness" in Sanskrit; hence
its other name, the "Heaven Mudra." This Mudra is designed to decrease the
Spirit (Space) Element in the body (middle finger) while increasing the Fire
Element’s energy (the thumb).
To assume Shunya Mudra, fold the middle finger and press on the knuckle
with the thumb. The remaining three fingers should stay extended (Figure 109).
Regular use of Shunya Mudra during meditation awakens intuition while
increasing willpower and calming the mind. In addition, its long-term
practitioners report gaining the ability to hear Anahata’s unstruck sound of
silence, which makes one feel like they are on a different Planet, in another
dimension of space-time. Thus, regular practise of this Mudra paves the way to
obtaining Eternal bliss and transcendence.
On a physical level, Shunya Mudra is known to relieve a range of hearing
and internal balance issues, including motion sickness, vertigo, body numbness,
and ear disorders. It is also known to cure heart and throat diseases. Practise this
Mudra for ten to fifteen minutes at a time, or longer if necessary. Repeat as often
as you like.
In Ayurvedic medicine, Shunya Mudra is beneficial for Vata Dosha
dominant people, which is the energy associated with movement, including blood
circulation, respiration, and the nervous system.

Figure 109: Shunya Mudra

Anjali Mudra
Anjali means "salutation" or "to offer" in Sanskrit. Anjali Mudra is
commonly accompanied by the word "Namaste," which forms a type of greeting
used frequently by Spiritual people in the Western world. This gesture, however,
originated in India and has been a part of its culture for thousands of years. It
consists of holding both palms held erect together in front of one’s breasts (Figure
110), often accompanied by a slight bow.
In Sanskrit, "Nama" means "bow" while "as" means "I" and "te" means
"you." Therefore, Namaste means "I bow to you." Namaste represents the belief
in a Divine spark of consciousness within each of us located in the Heart Chakra,
Anahata. By performing it, we recognize one another as Divine Souls from the
same source—God-the Creator.
Anjali Mudra can also be offered as a sacred greeting when trying to
establish contact with a higher power. This powerful hand gesture has been
adopted as the prayer position in the Western world for over two thousand years.
Its performance allows us to connect with our Holy Guardian Angel. By bringing
the hands together at the Heart Chakra centre, you symbolically and energetically
unify all opposites within you, allowing your consciousness to rise to a Higher
Plane.
Anjali Mudra reconciles our masculine and feminine energies while uniting
the left and right brain hemispheres. The result is coherence in the mind and body
on all levels. Its other health benefits include: improving focus, calming the mind,
promoting mindfulness, and relieving stress.

Figure 110: Anjali Mudra

Yoni Mudra
Yoni means "womb," "source," or "receptacle" in Sanskrit, and it is an
abstract representation of Shakti, the dynamic feminine power of nature. Yoni
also refers to the female reproductive system in general. Performing Yoni Mudra
balances the opposing but complementary energies in your body, especially the
two brain hemispheres.
To assume Yoni Mudra, place the palms of the hands together at the level of
the navel. The fingers and thumbs should be straight and pointing away from the
body. First, turn the middle, ring and little fingers inwards so that the backs of the
fingers are touching. Next, interlock the middle, ring, and little fingers while
keeping the tips of the index fingers and thumbs together. Finally, brings the
thumbs towards the body as you point the index fingers to the ground, thereby
forming the shape of the womb with the thumbs and index fingers (Figure 111).
In its final position, the elbows naturally tend to point to the side, opening up
the chest. You can do Yoni Mudra for ten to fifteen minutes at a time to obtain the
desired effect. Repeat as often as you like throughout the day.
The downward-pointing index fingers stimulate the flow of Apana, the
subtle energy that cleanses the body, mind, and emotions. Yoni Mudra has a
calming effect on the nervous system as it reduces stress and brings about peace
and harmony within. In addition, Yoni Mudra attunes us to the feminine, intuitive
aspect of our Being. Like a fetus in the womb, its practitioner experiences bliss by
becoming passive mentally and emotionally.

Figure 111: Yoni Mudra

Bhairava Mudra
Bhairava means "fearsome" in Sanskrit, and it refers to the ferocious
manifestation of Shiva the Destroyer. Bhairava Mudra is a symbolic, ritualistic
gesture of the hands that harmonises the body's energy flow during meditation or
other Yogic practices. This common Yogic practice gives an instant feeling of
peacefulness, enabling the higher qualities to emerge.
To perform Bhairava Mudra, place the right hand on top of the left, with the
palms facing up (Figure 112). If performed in a meditation Asana, the hands
should be on one's lap as the spine and head are held straight. When the left hand
is placed on top of the right, the practice is called Bhairavi Mudra, the feminine
(Shakti) counterpart of Bhairava.
The two hands represent the Ida (left hand) and Pingala (right hand) Nadis,
the feminine and masculine energy channels that become unified when one hand
is placed on top of the other. Depending on which hand is on top, however, this
gender principle becomes the expressive quality. For example, when the left hand
is on top, the Water Element is dominant, activating the principle of
consciousness and manifestation. Conversely, when the right hand is on top, the
Fire Element dominates, invoking strength and power and destroying one's
Egoism as the Divine Light absorbs into the Aura. Thus, this Mudra is also said to
cure all bodily diseases.
Do Bhairava Mudra for ten to fifteen minutes at a time or longer and repeat
as often as you like. Within Tantric and Yogic texts, Bhairava Mudra is
considered the ultimate Hand Mudra because its performance unifies the
individual Soul with the universal consciousness—the inward and outward Selves
become One.

Figure 112: Bhairava Mudra

Lotus Mudra
Lotus Mudra is designed to open the Heart Chakra, Anahata. It is a symbol
of purity and positivity, representing the Light emerging from the darkness. As
such, Lotus Mudra has powerful healing effects on mental, emotional, and
physical levels. Its performance relaxes and stabilizes the mind while creating a
more loving attitude towards other people. On a physical level, Lotus Mudra is
known to treat ulcers and fevers.
To perform Lotus Mudra, start by bringing the hands together in front of the
heart centre in Anjali Mudra. Next, spread the index, middle, and ring fingers like
a lotus flower opening while keeping the thumbs and little fingers together
(Figure 113). Remain in this position now and feel the effects of this Mudra on
your Heart Chakra. Lotus Mudra can be performed as often as you like, for a
minimum of ten minutes at a time to feel its effects.
As the roots of a lotus flower remain firmly embedded in the muddy bottom
of a pond, its flower head faces the sun, receiving its healing rays. In the same
fashion, Lotus Mudra teaches us to stay connected to our roots as we open our
hearts to the Divine Light. It teaches us to keep our thoughts pure and accept
others, even if our feelings are negative towards them. In doing so, we connect
with the grace and beauty present within us when our Heart Chakra is open.

Figure 113: Lotus Mudra

Shiva Linga Mudra
Shiva Linga Mudra is a powerful hand gesture representing the God Shiva
and the Goddess Parvati, his consort. The Lingam is emblematic of male creative
energy, the phallus, worshipped in Hindu Temples. It is represented symbolically
by the upright thumb of the right hand in Shiva Linga Mudra, while the palm on
which it rests represents the feminine energy, the receptacle. As such, this Mudra
denotes the integration of Shiva and Shakti (Shiva’s feminine energy). Its English
name is the "Upright Mudra."
To assume Shiva Linga Mudra, place your left hand at the abdomen level in
a bowl shape, keeping the fingers together. Next, place your right fist on top of
your left palm. Finally, extend the thumb of the right hand upward (Figure 114).
Feel the grounding effects of this Mudra in your Aura.
Shiva Linga Mudra’s focus is on Muladhara Chakra, the abode of the
Lingam. This Mudra relieves anxiety and stress by calming the mind and
charging the body with the dense Earth energy. It not only addresses physical and
mental fatigue by energizing the body but it increases self-confidence and
improves intuition. Because of its powerful effects in grounding one’s energy,
Shiva Linga Mudra should be done no more than two to three times a day for ten
minutes at a time.

Figure 114: Shiva Linga Mudra

Kundalini Mudra
Kundalini Mudra awakens the sexual force, stimulating creativity and
regeneration. This Mudra is known to activate dormant sexual desires and heal
any issues with the reproductive organs. On a subtle level, performing Kundalini
Mudra unifies the masculine and feminine principles within the Self, which
facilitates the awakening of the Kundalini at the base of the spine.
To perform Kundalini Mudra, make a loose fist at the navel level with both
hands. Next, extend the index finger of the left hand while you wrap the four
fingers of the right hand around it. The tip of the left hand’s index finger should
connect to the right hand’s thumb (Figure 115).
The left index finger represents the individual Soul and mind, while the four
fingers of the right hand symbolize the outside world. Finally, the right thumb is
the sacred power of the Kundalini. The Kundalini Mudra, as a whole, represents
the union of the individual Self with the Universe. Because of its potent effect on
one’s sexual energy, the Kundalini Mudra should be practised no more than two
to three times a day for ten minutes at a time.

Figure 115: Kundalini Mudra

Mana (Head Mudras)
Shambhavi Mudra (Eyebrow Centre Gazing)
Shambhavi Mudra is a highly regarded practice in Yoga and Tantra because
of its power in stilling the mind and experiencing higher states of consciousness.
It is a powerful technique of awakening Ajna Chakra since it involves gazing at
the eyebrow centre where the Mind’s Eye tunnel is located. Shambhavi Mudra
nullifies all positive and negative thoughts when applied correctly and brings
about a state of Void (Shoonya) or thoughtlessness/emptiness. Its other name is

Bhrumadya Drishti, where "bhru" means "eyebrow centre" and "drishti" means
"gazing" in Sanskrit.
The word "Shambhavi" originates from the Sanskrit "Shambhu," which is a
reference to Lord Shiva as one who is "born from happiness or bliss." Shambhavi
is the feminine aspect of Lord Shiva—the Kundalini Shakti. Shambhavi Mudra
not only activates Ajna Chakra but focusing on the eyebrow centre stimulates Ida
and Pingala Nadis to converge at this point, which directly affects the Kundalini
at the base of the spine and can facilitate a rising.
Shambhavi Mudra is beneficial for overcoming fearful, negative thoughts,
which originate from the subconscious mind. Focusing on the eyebrow centre
causes attention to be placed to the front of the head, where the conscious mind
operates from. In Hermeticism, the front of the head represents the Solar,
masculine aspect, while the back of the head represents the Lunar, feminine
aspect. On the Qabalistic Tree of Life, the path of Qoph (The Moon Tarot card),
which literally means "the back of the head," represents the subconscious mind.
Conversely, the path of Resh (The Sun Tarot card) means "head," referring to the
front of the head and the conscious mind.
To begin the Shambhavi Mudra exercise, sit in one of the three meditation
Asanas while relaxing the body and keeping your spine straight. Place your hands
on your knees in either the Jnana or Chin Mudra. Close the eyes and relax all the
muscles in the face, forehead, eyes, and behind the eyes while taking a few slow
and deep breaths. Now gradually open your eyes and look ahead of you at a fixed
point. For best results, implement Khechari Mudra as part of the practice,
although it is recommended to start without it until you get more familiar with the
exercise.

Figure 116: Shambhavi Mudra
Look upwards and inwards now as you focus your eyes on the eyebrow
centre while keeping the head and whole body still (Figure 116). If performed
correctly, the curve of the eyebrows will form a V-shaped image whose apex is at
the eyebrow centre. If you do not see the V-formation, then your gaze is not
directed upward and inwards correctly.

Concentrate on the point between the eyebrows without blinking for a few
seconds. Then, relax your eyes by moving them to their original position before
repeating the practice. It is crucial to hold the gaze for only a few seconds at first
and gradually increase the duration as you get more comfortable with this
exercise. There should never be too much strain on the eyes. If you feel
discomfort in your eyes, you can warm up your hands by rubbing them together
and covering the eyes to infuse healing energy and remove tension.
As you get more experience with this exercise, fixing your gaze on the
eyebrow centre will come naturally as the muscles that control the eyes become
stronger. When you perform the Shambhavi Mudra exercise, practise being
mindful while implementing Yogic Breathing on the inhale and exhale for
optimal effects.
Shambhavi Mudra can be incorporated as part of Asana practice and
Pranayama exercises such as Sama Vritti and Moorcha Pranayama. When
practised on its own, start with five rounds and gradually increase to ten over a
period of five months. Note that if you are having any health issues with your
eyes, you should not perform this exercise.
You can also practise Shambhavi Mudra with your eyes closed once you get
some experience with it. The closed-eyes variation of this exercise is the allimportant Mind’s Eye Meditation from The Magus. I discuss the mechanics of
this internal Shambhavi Mudra as part of the Kundalini Meditations from the
"Troubleshooting the System" chapter of this book.
Nasikagra Drishti (Nosetip Gazing)
Nasikagra Drishti is similar to Shambhavi Mudra, except that the eyes focus
on the nose tip instead of the eyebrow centre. The term comes from the Sanskrit
words "nasagra," meaning "nose tip" and "drishti," which translates as "gazing."
Nasikagra Drishti is excellent in strengthening the eye muscles, developing
concentration, and taking the practitioner to higher states of consciousness during
meditation. This exercise is known to activate Muladhara Chakra, which is
connected to the brain’s Frontal Lobe.
To practise nose tip gazing, hold your index finger upright at arm’s length at
the level of your nose. Fix your gaze upon it and slowly start moving it towards
the tip of your nose while keeping your head steady. When your finger reaches
the end of your nose (the eyes should still be focused on it), drop the finger and
transfer the focus of your eyes to your nose tip. After a few seconds of holding
your gaze there, close your eyes and relax them before repeating the practice.
Spend no more than three to five minutes a day on this exercise for the first two
weeks. After it becomes straightforward to fix your gaze on your nose tip at will,
you are ready for Nasikagra Drishti.

To begin Nasikagra Drishti, sit in one of the three meditation Asanas while
relaxing the body and keeping your spine and head straight. Place your hands on
your knees in either the Jnana or Chin Mudra. Close the eyes and relax all the
muscles in the face while taking a few deep, slow breaths. Gradually open your
eyes now and focus them on the nose tip (Figure 117). Refraction of light that
forms a V should be seen just above the tip of the nose if performed correctly.
Hold your gaze there for a few seconds before closing your eyes and repeating.
Spend no more than five to ten minutes a day on this exercise and increase the
duration after a few months.
You can implement Khechari Mudra as part of Nasikagra Drishti, although it
is recommended to start without it for the first little while. Always be mindful not
to put too much strain on your eyes; if you feel discomfort in your eyes, you can
warm up your hands by rubbing them together and covering the eyes to infuse
healing energy. Practise Nasikagra Drishti with Yogic Breathing on the inhale and
exhale for optimal effects. Individuals who have health issues with their eyes or
are suffering from depression should not perform this exercise.

Figure 117: Nasikagra Drishti
You can also practise Nasikagra Drishti with your eyes closed. I discovered
the closed-eyes nose tip meditation on my Spiritual journey and its power to
optimise the Kundalini circuit once it collapses. Later on, once I got into Yoga, I
found out about Nasikagra Drishti and its similar mechanics. I have found that by
focusing on the tip of your nose, you connect with the Subconscious Eye psychic
centre that lies in-between the two physical eyes, one centimetre outside of the
head.
An energy channel runs along the front of the nose from the Subconscious
Eye to the nose tip. The tip of the nose serves as a release point for the
Subconscious Eye. If this psychic centre becomes blocked, there is an increase of

negative energy and fear inside the mind, usually resulting from a collapsed Ida
channel. Focusing on the nose tip allows you to open or reopen this channel if it
becomes blocked, alleviating disturbing, fear-based thoughts and emotions. Refer
to the Kundalini Meditations for more information on this exercise (Middle of the
Eyes/Nose Bridge Meditation).
Shanmukhi Mudra (Closing the Seven Gates)
Shanmukhi Mudra is made of two root Sanskrit terms, "Shan" meaning
"six," and "mukhi" meaning "face" or "gate." As such, Shanmukhi Mudra refers
to the six gates of perception through which we sense the external world—the
two eyes, two ears, and the nose and mouth. This exercise involves closing the six
openings of perception to block the body's five senses—sight, sound, smell, and
touch.
According to the Yoga Sutras of Patanjali, Shanmukhi Mudra is considered
a practice of Pratyahara (sense withdrawal)—the preliminary stage of Dharana
(concentration) and Dhyana (meditation). Shanmukhi Mudra is excellent for
focus and introspection since by cutting ourselves off from the external world, we
gain deeper insight into our inner Self. It also calms the mind and nervous system
and relaxes and rejuvenates the eyes and facial muscles through the energy and
heat from the hands and fingers.
To begin the Shanmukhi Mudra exercise, sit in one of the three meditation
Asanas while keeping your spine straight. Place your hands on your knees in
either the Jnana or Chin Mudra. Close your eyes and take a few deep breaths to
relax your body. Allow yourself to feel your environment before you are to
become detached from it.
For maximum benefit and to potentially awaken the Kundalini at the base of
the spine, this exercise should be accompanied by Mula Bandha's application. As
such, place a small cushion beneath your perineum to apply pressure to this area,
thus activating Muladhara Chakra.
Raise the arms and elbows at shoulder level with your palms facing you.
One by one, start closing your sense organs with your fingers. Close the ears with
the thumbs, eyes with the index fingers, nostrils with the middle fingers, and the
mouth with the ring and little fingers (Figure 118). Release the pressure of the
middle fingers (partially) so that you can breathe through the nostrils. The rest of
the sense organs apply mild pressure to ensure that they remain closed during the
exercise.
Inhale slowly and deeply through the partially blocked nostrils using the
Yogic Breathing technique. At the end of the inhalation, close your nostrils with
the middle fingers and hold your breath. The longer you can comfortably hold
your breath, the more substantial effects you will receive from this exercise.

Release the pressure of the middle fingers now and exhale slowly through your
nostrils. This completes the first round.
Start with five minutes of practice and build it up to thirty minutes over three
months. When you are ready to end the exercise, lower your hands to your knees
while keeping your eyes closed. Spend a few moments becoming aware of your
surroundings before opening your eyes and concluding the practice.
For optimum effects with Shanmukhi Mudra, focus on the space between
your eyebrows with the eyes closed to connect with Ajna chakra. Pay attention to
your breathing as you become detached from the external world. With every
breath, you should be going deeper into your inner Self. As you do so, notice how
it makes you feel and the changes in your Heart Chakra. It is not uncommon to
hear different sounds from your interior, such as subtle vibrations emanating from
Bindu Chakra.
You can practise Shanmukhi Mudra at any time during the day, although it is
optimal right in the morning or before going to sleep. As with all Yogic exercises
that bring on an introverted state of mind, people suffering from depression
should not practise Shanmukhi Mudra.

Figure 118: Shanmukhi Mudra

Kaya (Postural Mudras)
Viparita Karani-Inverted Psychic Attitude
Viparita Karani comes from the Sanskrit words "viparita," meaning
"inverted," or "reversed," and "karani," meaning "a particular type of practice."
The purpose of this Postural Mudra is to reverse the downflow and loss of the
Amrita (the life-giving Ambrosia Nectar that secretes from the Bindu) through
the use of gravity. (You can learn more about the use and purpose of the Amrita in
the "Lalana Chakra and the Amrita Nectar" chapter in this section.) Its other goal

is to create a sublimation of energy from bottom to top of the body and balance its
Pranic energy flow. Because the attention should be placed on Manipura and
Vishuddhi on the inhale and exhale, Viparita Karani serves to optimize these two
Chakras as well.

Figure 119: Viparita Karani

To come into the Viparita Karani pose, bring your legs over the head while
supporting your hips with your hands. You should hold your torso as close to a
45-degree angle as possible while the legs are straight up (Figure 119). Your eyes
should look upwards at your feet while your toes point to the sky. Keep your
elbows close to each other while being mindful to keep your chin from pressing
against your chest. In the final position, the body's weight rests on the shoulders,
neck, and elbows. If you have issues coming into this pose, you can use a wall
and pillows to support your legs and torso. Close your eyes now and relax your
whole body.
Apply Jiva Bandha (tongue on the roof of the mouth) or Khechari Mudra for
the entire practice. Then, inhale slowly and deeply with Ujjayi Pranayama while
placing your awareness on Manipura Chakra. On the exhale, move your attention
on Vishuddhi Chakra. This completes the first round.
Practise up to seven rounds at first, switching your attention from Manipura
on the inhale to Vishuddhi on the exhale and vice versa. If you feel the pressure
build-up in the head or other discomfort arises, end the practice immediately.
Gradually increase the number of rounds from seven to twenty-one over
three months. Your inhalation and exhalation should be the same duration during
this practice. As you get more comfortable with it, work on increasing the
duration while keeping the same ratio.
To end the practice, slowly lower the spine, vertebra by vertebra, while
keeping your head on the floor. After your buttocks are lowered, bring down your
legs while keeping them straight. Spend a few moments in Shavasana now to
allow your consciousness to ground itself. It is also advisable to perform an
Asana counterpose afterwards to balance your energies.
Viparita Karani is best practised in the morning. Incorporate this exercise at
the end of your daily Asana practice program and/or before meditation. Note that
people suffering from high blood pressure, heart disease, neck or back pain, or
excessive toxins in the body should not perform Viparita Karani. Also, since
performing this exercise for an extended period increases the metabolic rate,
avoid it for at least three hours after a meal.
Pashinee Mudra-Folded Psychic Attitude
Pashinee Mudra is derived from the Sanskrit term "pash," meaning "noose."
The word "Pashinee" refers to being "bound in a noose," which this position
resembles. Practising this Mudra provides tranquillity and balance to the nervous
system and induces Pratyahara. It stretches the neck as well as the spine and back
muscles.
To begin the Pashinee Mudra exercise, assume Halasana (Plough Pose) but
separate the legs about one and a half feet. Bend the knees and bring your thighs

towards your chest until your knees are on the floor. In the final position, the
knees should be as close as possible towards the shoulders and ears (Figure 120).
Relax the body and close your eyes. Take slow and deep breaths. Maintain
this position as long as comfortably possible. Now, gently release the arms and
come back to Halasana. Lower the legs and relax in Shavasana for a few
moments to allow your consciousness to ground itself.
As with Viparita Karani, it is advisable to perform a counterpose to balance
out your energies, which would be a backward bending Asana. Note that people
suffering from a spinal condition or neck injury should avoid this Mudra. Also,
menstruating or pregnant women should skip this practice.

Figure 120: Pashinee Mudra

Tadagi Mudra
Tadagi is derived from the Sanskrit term "tadaga," meaning "water body" or
"water pot-like structure, similar to a lake or pond. This Mudra technique
involves moulding the abdomen into a barrel shape through deep abdominal
breathing, hence its name. Tadagi Mudra stimulates Manipura and Hara Chakras,
raising the level of Prana in the body. In addition, it encourages blood circulation
to the abdominal organs while relieving any held tension from the pelvic floor.
Sit on the floor or a yoga mat with legs stretched out straight and the feet
slightly apart. (The legs should remain straight throughout the exercise.) To
assume Tadagi Mudra, begin by placing the hands on the knees while keeping the
head and spine straight. Next, close the eyes and relax the entire body while
breathing normally. Bend forward now and wrap the thumbs, index, and middle
fingers over your big toes (Figure 121).
Inhale slowly and fill your abdomen with oxygen, allowing it to expand
fully. Retain the breath for an extended period comfortably. There should not be
any strain on your body at any time during this exercise. You can release the toes
between breaths to adjust and make yourself more comfortable.
Exhale slowly and deeply, letting the belly relax while maintaining a hold on
your toes. One round is now complete. Repeat the rounds five to ten times. When
you are ready to end the practice, release the toes and return to the starting
position. Note that pregnant women and people suffering from a hernia or
prolapse should avoid this exercise.

Figure 121: Tadagi Mudra
Manduki Mudra-Gesture of the Frog
Manduki means "frog" in Sanskrit, and it mimics the posture of a frog at
rest. Its other name is the "Gesture of the Frog," or "Frog Attitude." This Mudra
stimulates Muladhara Chakra and balances the Pranic energy flow in the body. It
calms the mind, balances Ida and Pingala Nadis, and enhances levels of insight.
Since it involves a powerful Yoga Asana, it enhances the strength of the hips,
knees, and ankles and makes them more flexible.
Begin in a simple kneeling position where both of the knees are touching the
ground. Then, to perform Manduki Mudra, adjust your legs so that your toes are
pointing outward and your buttocks are resting on the floor (Figure 122). If this
position is uncomfortable for you, sit on a cushion instead, placing your legs and
feet in the same position.
You should feel pressure being applied to the perineum, thus triggering
Muladhara Chakra. Next, place your hands on your knees in either the Jnana or
Chin Mudra. You should hold your spine and head straight during this exercise. If
you find yourself naturally leaning forward from this position, hold your knees
and straighten your arms for support. Close your eyes now and relax your whole
body.

Open your eyes and perform Nasikagra Drishti. Start by placing your tongue
on your palate (Jiva Bandha) for a minute or two and then transition to Khechari
Mudra. Your breath should be slow and rhythmic. If you feel discomfort in your
eyes, close them for a few seconds and then resume the practice. Practise
Manduki Mudra with Yogic Breathing on the inhale and exhale for optimal
effects.
Start with doing this exercise for two minutes once a day, preferably in the
morning. As you get more familiar with it, gradually increase up to five minutes
for optimal effects. The senses should become drawn inwards when performed
correctly.
Manduki Mudra is an advanced version of Nasikagra Drishti. As such, it
should be practised in mild light so that the tip of the nose can be seen clearly.
Follow the precautions for practising Nasikagra Drishti. People with problems
with the ankles, knees, or hips should exercise caution when performing Manduki
Mudra since it requires these body parts to be flexible.

Figure 122: Manduki Mudra

Bandha (Lock Mudras)
Mula Bandha (Perineum Contraction)

Mula Bandha is the first of three major energy locks used in Yogic practices
to control the flow of Prana in the body along with Uddiyana and Jalandhara
Bandhas. Each of the three Bandhas (locks) seals a specific part of the body,
sending the Prana inwards and upwards through Sushumna Nadi. When all three
Bandhas are used together, the practice is called Maha Bandha, meaning the
"Great Lock" (Figure 132). Each Bandha can also be used to untie one of the
Three Granthis (psychic knots), which obstruct the Kundalini energy on its
upwards rise.
Mula Bandha means "Root Lock" in Sanskrit, referring to the process of
harnessing energy in Muladhara, the Root Chakra and sending it upwards through
Sushumna. Mula Bandha is the initial energy lock used to stir the Kundalini into
activity at the base of the spine.
Performing Mula Bandha involves the contraction of specific muscles
between the anus and genital organs in the perineum region where Muladhara’s
flower head is located. The exact contraction point for males is between the anus
and testes, while in females, it is behind the cervix, where the uterus protrudes
into the vagina (Figure 123).
Since it is the junction point for the nerves, the perineum area is where our
nervous system starts. Contracting the perineum with Mula Bandha has a calming
effect on the nervous system, promoting peace of mind while increasing
concentration.
On a Pranic level, Mula Bandha redirects the energy of Apana, the aspect of
Prana within the body that flows downward from the navel. Reversing the
direction of Apana’s flow coupled with stimulating the three Nadis that
commence in the Muladhara region can have a powerful effect at awakening the
Kundalini from its slumber in the coccyx region.
During a Kundalini awakening, Mula Bandha can be used to transcend
Brahma Granthi that exists between Muladhara and Swadhisthana Chakras. In
doing so, the Soul is liberated from particular attachments that bind it to the
World of Matter. Overcoming Brahma Granthi is essential to raising the
Kundalini into the Chakras above Muladhara.
On a physical level, Mula Bandha strengthens the muscles of the pelvic
floor. It prevents premature ejaculation in men, while for women, it soothes the
pain of menstruation. Psychologically, Mula Bandha aids in regulating hormones
and promoting healthy mental and emotional growth and development. This
timeless technique balances the male and female sex hormones—testosterone and
estrogen. It regulates thyroxine, which helps in metabolic activities, as well as
serotonin, the mood-elevating hormone. Mula Bandha is very effective in treating
mental issues such as mania, hysteria, phobias, neuroses, and general depression.

To begin the Mula Bandha exercise, choose one of the three meditation
Asanas, preferably Siddhasana, which allows you to press on your perineum with
your heel. Keep your spine and neck straight while closing your eyes and relaxing
the whole body. For added effect, you may place your hands on your knees in
either the Jnana or Chin Mudra.
Become aware of the natural breath as you focus your awareness on the
perineal region. On the next inhale, contract this region by pulling up the pelvic
floor muscles, lifting them towards the spine. On the exhale, release and relax the
pelvic muscles. Breathe slowly and deeply. Continue contracting and relaxing the
perineal/vaginal region in a controlled, rhythmic manner, timing it with the inhale
and exhale. Do this exercise for a few minutes as preparation for the following
step.
Instead of letting go of the next contraction, hold it tightly for a few seconds
while maintaining relaxation in the rest of the body. Focus on the pelvic floor and
ensure that you have contracted only the perineal muscles related to the
Muladhara region and not the anus or urinary sphincters. Hold for a few seconds.
Release the contraction now, allowing the pelvic muscles to relax. Repeat the
exercise for as long as you want with maximal contraction followed by total
relaxation of the pelvic muscles.
The final stage of Mula Bandha involves breath retention (Khumbaka).
Inhale deeply as you contract the perineum muscles. Hold the breath now as long
as you can comfortably while maintaining the contraction. As you exhale, release
the contraction while relaxing the entire pelvic region. Take a few normal breaths
before commencing with the next contraction coupled with breath retention.
Repeat the exercise as long as you want. When you are ready to end the practice,
open your eyes.
Mula Bandha can be performed with different Asanas, Pranayamas, Mudras,
and Bandhas, for optimal effects. When practised on its own, it should be
performed as a precursor for meditation.

Figure 123: Mula Bandha Contraction Point
Uddiyana Bandha (Abdominal Contraction)
Uddiyana in Sanskrit means "Upwards Flying," relating to the technique of
locking Pranic energy in the abdominal region and directing it upwards through
Sushumna Nadi. This "Abdominal Lock" involves contracting and lifting the
abdominal wall inside (towards spine) and upwards (towards ribcage) at the same
time. When applied correctly, the diaphragm rises towards the chest. Keep in
mind that this exercise is performed with external breath retention only.
The best time to practise Uddiyana Bandha is in the morning on an empty
stomach and with empty bowels. This exercise prepares your stomach for better
digestion throughout the day since it kindles the digestive fires while purifying
toxins from the body. It massages and cleanses the abdominal organs while toning
the deep interior muscles in this area. Uddiyana Bandha allows for more optimal
blood circulation to the abdominal organs by creating a vacuum in your chest. It
also balances the Adrenal Glands, removing tension and easing anxiety. Many
Yogis have noted that performing Uddiyana Bandha stops the ageing process and
makes older people feel young again.
On an energetic level, performing Uddiyana Bandha charges Hara Chakra
with Pranic energy while stimulating Manipura Chakra, which strongly influences
the distribution of energy throughout the body. The suction pressure created by
Uddiyana Bandha reverses the energy flow of Apana and Prana, uniting them
with Samana. When combined with Mula Bandha and Jalandhara Bandha as part
of Maha Bandha (Great Lock), this exercise can not only trigger a Kundalini

awakening but can help raise the Kundalini to the Crown. (More on this in a later
chapter.)
During a Kundalini awakening, Uddiyana Bandha can be used to transcend
Vishnu Granthi that exists between Manipura and Anahata Chakras. Overcoming
Vishnu Granthi allows us to experience unconditional love in Anahata Chakra
that the higher Spirit Chakras fuel. Reaching the Heart Chakra is crucial in the
Kundalini awakening process since we awaken the Guru within—our Higher
Self.
You can practise Uddiyana Bandha in the standing or sitting positions. The
standing position makes it easier to focus and control the abdominal muscles if
you are a beginner. You then want to progress to a sitting position when
comfortable with the mechanics of this exercise.
To begin Uddiyana Bandha in a standing position, keep your spine straight
and bend your knees slightly, keeping a distance of one-and-a-half feet between
them. Lean forward now while putting your hands on your thighs, slightly above
the kneecaps. The spine should be horizontal while the arms are straight as the
fingers point inwards or downwards, whatever is more comfortable. You should
slightly bend the knees as they support the weight of the upper body (Figure 124).
Relax now while taking a few slow and deep breaths, in through the nostrils
and out through the mouth. There should be an automatic contraction of the
abdominal region occurring while in this position. Bend the head forward but
don’t press the chin against the chest as that triggers Jalandhara Bandha.
Take a deep breath now, and as you exhale, straighten the knees, which will
automatically contract the abdomen upwards and inwards towards the spine,
activating Uddiyana Bandha. When you are ready, inhale deeply and release the
Abdominal Lock as you relax your belly and chest. Raise the head and torso now
to the upright position. Remain in the standing position until your breath comes
back to normal. The first round is now complete.
To begin Uddiyana Bandha in a sitting position, get into Padmasana or
Siddhasana, where the knees make contact with the floor. Relax the body while
keeping your spine straight. Place the palms of the hands flat on the knees. Take a
few deep breaths while maintaining relaxation of the body.
Inhale deeply now through the nostrils. As you exhale, lean forward slightly
and press down on your knees with your hands as you straighten your elbows and
raise your shoulders, allowing further extension of the spinal cord. Next, bend the
head forward and press the chin against the chest, triggering Jalandhara Bandha.
As part of the same motion, contract the abdominal muscles inward and upward
towards the spine, activating Uddiyana Bandha. Hold without breath as long as
you can comfortably and without strain.

Figure 124: Standing Uddiyana Bandha

When you are ready, inhale deeply and release the Abdominal Lock as you
bend the elbows and lower the shoulders. Raise your head now on the exhale,
releasing Jalandhara Bandha, and remain in this position until your breathing
returns to normal. This completes the first round.
Note that you need to exhale completely to get into Uddiyana Bandha since
the abdominal contraction depends on having an empty stomach. As you hold
your breath, be mindful not to inhale at all, as doing so can minimize the effects
of Uddiyana Bandha.
Start the practice with three to five rounds initially and gradually increase to
ten rounds over a few months. Uddiyana Bandha is ideally performed in
combination with different Asanas, Pranayamas, Mudras, and Bandhas. When
practised on its own, it should be performed as a precursor to meditation. Note
that you can practise Uddiyana Bandha in conjunction with Jalandhara Bandha
(Figure 125) but also without it. Work with both methods to get familiar with the
effects of each.
People suffering from high blood pressure, hernia, stomach or intestinal
ulcer, heart disease, or other abdominal issues should not practise Uddiyana
Bandha. Also, women should not practise Maha Mudra during menstruation or
pregnancy.

Figure 125: Sitting Uddiyana Bandha (With Jalandhara Bandha)
Jalandhara Bandha (Throat Lock)
In Sanskrit, "Jal" means "throat," while Jalan means "web" or "net" and
"dharan" means "stream" or "flow." Jalandhara Bandha controls and captures
energy in the throat through the nerves and vessels in the neck area. It is quite
simple to perform as it requires the practitioner merely to bring the chin down and
rest it on the chest, thus restricting the breath to go down. This powerful exercise
stretches the spinal cord in the neck area while having powerful, subtle effects on
an inner level.
Jalandhara Bandha targets the Throat Chakra, Vishuddhi, which is the lowest
of the three Spirit Chakras. Obstructing the flow of Prana to the head by locking

the throat supercharges the lower four Elemental Chakras. It stimulates the upper
body organs while the other two Bandhas, Uddiyana and Mula, target the lower
body.
To begin Jalandhara Bandha, sit in a meditative pose that allows the knees to
touch the floor. You can also practise this exercise standing, such as in the
Mountain Pose. While sitting, you may place your hands on your knees in either
the Jnana or Chin Mudra as you close your eyes and relax the entire body. Inhale
deeply and hold your breath. Bend the head forward now and press the chin
tightly against the chest. Straighten the arms and lock them into position, which
will raise the shoulders upward and forward slightly. Bring your awareness to
your throat and hold it there.
Stay in this pose while retaining the breath (internal Khumbaka) as long as
possible, feeling the effects of this exercise. When you are ready to release the
energy lock, bend the arms, allowing the shoulders to relax, followed by slowly
raising the head and exhaling, all in one motion. This completes one round. Take
a few breaths now, allowing your respiration to return to normal before starting
the next round.
Keep in mind that you can also perform this exercise by holding your breath
out after an exhalation (external Khumbaka). The procedure is the same except
that you bend the head down and hold the breath after the exhale, instead of the
inhale. Be mindful never to inhale or exhale until the chin lock has been released
and the head is upright. Start the practice with three to five rounds and gradually
increase to ten rounds over a few months.
Note that Jalandhara Bandha is best practised in the morning and can be
added to various Pranayama exercises and Bandhas. Remember to keep your
spine straight; otherwise, you will disrupt the flow of energies through the central
channel of the spine. People suffering from high blood pressure, heart problems,
or throat and neck issues, should not practise Jalandhara Bandha.

Jiva Bandha
Jiva (or Jivha) Bandha is the fourth Bandha, and one of the most useful tools
in Yoga, especially for Kundalini awakened individuals. It can be used on its own
or as an alternative to Khechari Mudra during certain Asanas, Mudras, or
Pranayamas. Jiva means "Being with a Life Force or Soul" in Sanskrit, and so this
Bandha allows the individual to control their Pranic energy. Prana is
indestructible, and its origin is the Sun, as is the origin of the Soul. Prana is best
described as an extension of Life Energy of the Soul. Jiva Bandha is essential in
closing the Kundalini energy circuit in the Body of Light so that sublimated Prana
can circulate and nourish the Seven Chakras.
Jiva Bandha involves placing your tongue on the upper palate of your mouth
and connecting its tip to the underside of the front teeth (Figure 126). You should
not be applying any pressure but merely hold the tongue in this position.
All fully Kundalini awakened individuals should implement Jiva Bandha as
the neutral position of their tongues since doing so allows the Kundalini energy to
channel upwards towards the Mind’s Eye where Ida and Pingala unite, opening
the doorway of the Seventh Eye. As described before, the Bindu is the entry point
of the Kundalini circuit, while the Seventh Eye is the exit point. Both need to be
open for the Kundalini awakened individual to experience the rapturous realm of
Non-Duality, the Spiritual Realm. Jiva Bandha facilitates this experience and can
also be used to rebuild the Kundalini circuit in awakened individuals.
Jiva Bandha can be performed with the mouth closed, as I just described, or
the mouth open. Yogis believe that Prana can only be assimilated through the
sinuses; therefore, having the mouth open is not vital for breathing and benefiting
the consciousness. However, since having the mouth open while practising Jiva
Bandha relaxes the jaw, it is also recommended as a practice.
For Kundalini awakened individuals, performing Jiva Bandha with the
mouth open as a regular part of the day would be impractical. As such, Jiva
Bandha should be practised with the mouth open when the individual is on their
own and in a safe space. In both instances, you should be implementing Yogic
Breathing with emphasis on Diaphragmatic and Thoracic Breathing. For added
benefits, practise Ujjayi Pranayama.

Figure 126: Jiva Bandha

Maha Mudra-The Great Gesture
Maha means "great" in Sanskrit, which is why this Mudra’s English name is
the "Great Seal," "Great Gesture," or "Great Psychic Attitude." Maha Mudra is
called that because it involves various individual Yoga techniques, elevating one’s
sexual energy potential and facilitating an Alchemical transformation.
Maha Mudra is the first of ten Mudras mentioned in Hatha Yoga Pradipika,
believed to have the power to destroy old age and death. Apart from its benefits
as a Mudra, it is considered a master Asana because it combines all five
directional movements of the spine: forward bend, backbend, twist, lateral bend,
and axial extension.
Unlike other Yoga Mudras, Maha Mudra is a type of Bandha Mudra (lock
gesture) since it involves one or more of the three Bandhas. When all three
Bandhas are applied, the top and bottom of the trunk are sealed so that no Prana
can release from the body, increasing the potential to awaken the Kundalini
energy at the base of the spine.
Maha Mudra is best done in the morning on an empty stomach. There are
two notable variations of Maha Mudra. In the first variation, you exert pressure
on the perineum with the heel (Mula Bandha) while performing Shambhavi

Mudra and practising internal breath retention (Khumbaka). Doing so harnesses
the energies of Muladhara, Vishuddhi, and Ajna Chakras. The whole energy
system is charged with Prana, which intensifies awareness and facilitates
meditation.
A second variation is an advanced form called Maha Bheda Mudra.
("Bheda" in Sanskrit means "piercing.") The second variation contains the same
elements as the first with the addition of Uddiyana and Jalandhara Bandhas,
which activates the Kundalini to rise through Sushumna, piercing the Seven
Chakras along the way.
To begin Maha Mudra, sit on the floor or your Yoga mat with the legs
outstretched and your spine straight. Breathe slowly and deeply. Your hands
should be placed on the floor by your side. Fold the left leg now and exert
pressure on the perineum with the left heel. Your left knee should be touching the
floor. The right leg is to remain outstretched throughout the practice. Place both
hands now on the right knee as you relax your whole body and implement
Khechari Mudra.
Bend forward now and hold the big toe of the right foot with both hands.
Your head should be facing forward, and your spine kept as straight as possible
(Figure 127). Slowly inhale now while activating Mula Bandha. Tilt and hold the
head slightly back. Perform Shambhavi Mudra now while holding your breath for
eight to ten seconds.
While holding your breath, cycle your awareness from the eyebrow centre to
the throat, down to the perineum, and back again. Mentally repeat "Ajna,
Vishuddhi, Muladhara" while maintaining concentration on each Chakra for one
to two seconds. As you exhale, release Shambhavi Mudra and Mula Bandha
while returning your head to the upright position. Repeat the entire process but
with the right leg folded instead. This completes one round, which is equivalent
to two complete breaths.
The second variation involves contracting the abdominal region after
activating Mula Bandha, which starts Uddiyana Bandha. Next, instead of bending
the head back, you move it forward, thus initiating Jalandhara Bandha. Finally,
Shambhavi Mudra is performed as you hold your breath for eight to ten seconds.
Mentally repeat "Vishuddhi, Manipura, Muladhara" as you concentrate on the
throat, abdomen, and perineum, in succession, for one to two seconds each.
When you exhale, release Shambhavi Mudra, followed by unlocking the
Bandhas in reverse order. Repeat the same process with the right foot folded, thus
completing one full round. In Maha Bheda Mudra, a combination of Asana,
Pranayama, Bandha, and Mudra are all involved for optimal Spiritual results.
Start by practising three rounds with the first variation for a few weeks until
you get some experience with this exercise. Then you can practise the second,

more advanced variation with the Three Bandhas applied. After a few months,
increase the number of rounds to five. Maha Bheda Mudra supplements Maha
Mudra to supercharge the entire mind-body system.
You should only practise Maha Mudra after an Asana and Pranayama
session and before a meditation session. Always complete the Maha Mudra
process by practising it on both the left and right sides.
Precautions for Shambhavi Mudra are applied during this exercise.
Individuals suffering from high blood pressure, heart problems, or glaucoma
should not perform Maha Mudra. Because it generates a lot of heat in the body, it
is best to avoid this practice during hot summer days. Also, women should not
practise Maha Mudra during menstruation or pregnancy. For Maha Bheda Mudra,
precautions for Uddiyana and Jalandhara Bandhas are included as well.

Figure 127: Maha Mudra

Adhara (Perineal Mudras)
Vajroli Mudra (Male) and Sahajoli Mudra (Female)

Vajroli Mudra is an advanced Hatha Yoga practice that aims to preserve the
semen in males, allowing the sexual energy to sublimate and be used for Spiritual
purposes. Sahajoli Mudra is the female counterpart of the same practice that
yields similar benefits.
Vajroli is derived from the Sanskrit root word "vajra," which is an
indestructible weapon of the Hindu God Indra with the properties of lightning,
namely the thunderbolt. Thus, when the practitioner has achieved control over
their sexual force in the genital area, it makes it move upwards into the Chakras
with the power of lightning. For this reason, Vajroli Mudra is often called the
"Thunderbolt Gesture."
Vajra is also a Nadi that begins at the genitals, which engages the sexual
energy. Activation of the Vajra Nadi with this Mudra allows the sexual energy to
rise upwards into the brain, not only increasing one’s vigour but facilitating
meditative states. Conversely, Sahajoli comes from the root word "sahaj," which
means "spontaneous," relating to the arousal and control of the sexual force in
females.
Vajroli Mudra involves contracting the muscles around the base of the penis,
strengthening them over time. This practice enables control over the urogenital
system, including holding the orgasm through semen retention. As a result,
Vajroli Mudra is a powerful exercise that leads to sexual potency even in old age.
In addition, its daily practice prevents premature ejaculation, a common issue in
men.
Sahajoli is a practice that involves the contraction of the urinary passage to
redirect the sexual energy in females and also allow it to move upwards into the
Chakras and the brain. This practice provides control over the menstrual flow and
helps control ovulation.
On a subtle level, both Vajroli and Sahajoli Mudras stimulate Swadhisthana
Chakra, which is involved in the Kundalini awakening process. Both exercises
tone the urogenital region while taking care of urinary disorders. In addition, both
practices are therapeutic for sexual disfunction.
To begin Vajroli or Sahajoli Mudras, sit in any comfortable meditation
Asana and keep your head and spine straight. Next, place the hands on the knees
in either Jnana or Chin Mudras, close the eyes, and relax the entire body. Your
breathing should be normal. Place your awareness on the urethra now (Figure
128). Males should put their attention on the root of their penis, not the tip.
Inhale deeply and hold your breath while drawing the urethra upwards. This
action is similar to intensely needing to urinate but holding it back. As you
perform this contraction, the testes in men and the labia in women should move
up slightly towards the navel. Make sure that your contraction is limited to the
urethra alone. Hold the contraction for as long as it is comfortable, and then

release it as you exhale the breath. This completes one round. Perform five to ten
rounds of Vajroli or Sahajoli Mudras for the first few weeks. As your holding
capacity improves, gradually increase to twenty rounds within a few months.
For a more advanced version of these two exercises, enter the Navasana,
Boat Pose instead of a meditation Asana. Keep in mind that you will need a
strong core to perform this variation. To begin, start in Shavasana as you breathe
normally and relax. Then, bring your legs to a specific angle to the ground and
keep them straight. Now, raise your chest to form a V-shape with your body,
resting all of your weight on your buttocks. You should feel immense pressure on
the abdominal muscles during the Boat Pose. Lift your hands straight in front of
you now to balance yourself.
From Navasana, follow the same instructions of contracting the urethra and
holding the breath after the inhale, and then releasing the contraction as you
exhale. If you have difficulties with internal breath retention, you may breathe
normally instead during this exercise variation. When you are finished with the
exercise, go back into Shavasana for a few minutes to relax before ending the
practice. Note that people suffering from medical conditions related to the urinary
tract should consult a physician before commencing Vajroli or Sahajoli Mudras.

Figure 128: Vajroli, Sahajoli, and Ashwini Mudras Contraction Points
Ashwini Mudra (Horse Gesture)
Ashwini Mudra is a Tantric practice used to generate and carry Pranic
energy upwards through the Sushumna channel. This practice involves
rhythmically contracting the anal sphincter, which generates Pranic energy in the

Pelvic floor before pumping it upwards. It is an easy practice that stimulates the
Kundalini energy, which lies between the perineum and coccyx at Muladhara
Chakra.
Ashwini’s root word "Ashwa" is the Sanskrit transliteration for "horse." This
exercise is referred to as the Horse Gesture because it mimics the peculiar way in
which horses contract their anal muscles after they defecate, thereby pulling
energy upwards instead of allowing it to flow down.
By contracting the anal muscles with Ashwini Mudra, the energy that
usually flows downwards and out of the body (Apana Vayu) gets reversed and
flows up towards the internal organs, strengthening them in the process. When
Apana Vayu fills the lower organs to full capacity, pressure occurs at the bottom
of the spine, making Pranic energy flow through Sushumna Nadi.
Although Ashwini Mudra is similar to Mula Bandha, the muscles involved
in the process are different. In Ashwini Mudra, we engage a larger area of the
pelvic muscles, which makes it a suitable preparatory exercise for Mula Bandha.
While Ashwini Mudra is focused on contracting and releasing the anal muscles,
redirecting the natural flow of energy and facilitating its flow upwards, Mula
Bandha’s focus is on holding the muscles to lock in energy in the pelvic area.
To begin the Ashwini Mudra exercise, sit in any comfortable meditation
Asana. Close your eyes and relax the whole body while becoming aware of your
natural breathing. Place your awareness on your anus now (Figure 128) and
contract your anal sphincter muscles for a few seconds, then relax them. Breathe
normally as you do so.
For maximum contraction, apply a little more pressure inside the anus to lift
the sphincter muscles upwards. You should feel like you are holding in your
bowel movement, then releasing. Perform the contraction ten to twenty times
smoothly and rhythmically. Upon completion of the exercise, release the seated
posture and then come out of the pose slowly.
For a more advanced variation of Ashwini Mudra, you can practise internal
breath retention (Khumbaka) during the contraction phase. Inhale slowly and
deeply, then contract the anal sphincter muscles for five seconds while holding
your breath. On the exhale, release the contraction. Perform five to ten rounds of
this variation of Ashwini Mudra for the first few weeks, up to twenty rounds
within a few months.
Note that practitioners can also incorporate Pranayama, Bandhas, and other
Mudras with Ashwini Mudra. For example, you can include Jalandhara Bandha
and Khechari Mudra along with Diaphragmatic and Thoracic Breathing for
maximum effects. Doing so will have a greater impact on the Kundalini at the
base of the spine and may facilitate a rising.

Regular use of Ashwini Mudra purifies the energy channels in the body
(Nadis), resulting in a more balanced mental and emotional state. On a physical
level, its daily use overcomes many ailments related to the lower abdomen and
colon. In addition, it gives the practitioner conscious control over their
unconscious body activity, resulting in greater control over the autonomic
nervous system. For men, the performance of Ashwini Mudra aids in erectile
disfunction while regulating the Prostate Gland and clearing any issues related to
it.
Pregnant women and people with high blood pressure or heart disease
should not perform Ashwini Mudra with internal breath retention. As a final note,
be mindful not to contract the anal muscles when your bowels are full of stool or
gas.

THE FIVE PRANA VAYUS
Prana is Light energy; a Life Force that interpenetrates every atom of
our bodies and the Solar System we are in. Pranic energy originates from the
Sun and is directly responsible for our vitality and well-being. As
mentioned, we receive Prana from the food we eat, the water we drink, and
the air we breathe—it is the Life energy that sustains our mind, body, and
Soul.
The very act of breathing is an act of bringing Prana into the body. Each
breath replenishes the bloodstream with oxygen and cultivates the fires of
cellular metabolism while ridding the body of wastes. Supplying our bodies
with food and oxygen creates the foundation for every activity we do.
In the human body, Pranic energy directly affects the Astral Plane,
relating particularly to Pranamaya Kosha or the Higher Astral Body of the
Water Element. Prana divides into five sub-energies called the Five Vayus.
In Sanskrit, Vayu translates to "wind" or "air," concerning the act of
breathing. Vayu is also the Air Element Tattva and one of the classical
Elements in Hinduism. Breath control and breathing exercises are essential
in all Yogic and meditation practices—manipulating Prana in the body can
have many effects, one of which is to awaken the Kundalini energy at the
base of the spine.
The Five Prana Vayus directly affect the Water Element in the body
through the Air Element since water requires air to animate it and give it life.
This correspondence is also found in nature since the H2O (water) molecule
contains oxygen (air) within itself. In the same way, the act of breathing
regulates one’s consciousness from one moment to the next.
The Five Vayus are Prana, Apana, Samana, Udana, and Vyana (Figure
129). Each Prana Vayu is regulated by one or multiple Chakras, and each
Vayu is responsible for different yet crucial functions in the body. When we
understand each Prana Vayu's role, we can comprehend how Prana serves
our bodies. The Five Vayus are the different manifestations and processes of
Prana in the same way as the various limbs comprise the human body.
To be clear, Prana works through the physical body as well as the Light
Body. Food and oxygen are brought in through the physical body, which is
then broken down to power the Chakras and nourish the Light Body and its
corresponding Subtle Bodies (related to the inner Cosmic Planes). The Light

Body requires these different mechanisms that process and put Pranic energy
to use. The Five Vayus can be compared to large oceans, where each ocean
contains thousands of smaller currents within them.

Figure 129: The Five Prana Vayus
Prana Vayu
Operating from the head/chest area as upward-flowing energy, Prana
Vayu translates as "forward-moving air." It is responsible for everything that
enters our bodies, such as oxygen, food, and sensory information. As such,
Prana Vayu refers to how we take in energy, most important of which is the
inhale since we cannot live without oxygen for more than several minutes.
Prana Vayu is associated with Anahata Chakra and the Air Element. It
regulates our thoughts. It is the most important of the Five Vayus, so the
general term "Prana" is used to encompass all of the Five Vayus. Prana Vayu
is the fundamental energy in the body that directs the four other Vayus.
Prana Vayu regulates respiration, immunity, vitality, and the heart. It
relates to intelligence and the power of sensory and motor functions. The
organs it governs are the heart and lungs. Although some schools of thought
say that the primary abode of Prana is in the chest/heart area, others say it
extends into the head as well. Every time we focus our attention on
something, we manipulate Prana in the body and involve Ajna Chakra in the
process.
Apana Vayu
Operating from the base of the torso, Apana Vayu translates as the "air
that moves away." It is associated with Muladhara Chakra and the Earth
Element. Earth is the final Element in the manifestation process, and Apana
is the Prana Vayu that represents the elimination of all that our body doesn’t
need anymore, such as negative energy and bodily waste, like faeces and
urine, semen, and menstrual fluid. Apana then represents the downward, and
outward-flowing energy and the exhale of the breath.
As the head contains openings suitable for the inward flow of Prana, the
base of the torso has openings required for the work of Apana. Apana
governs the kidneys, bladder, bowels, and excretory and reproductive
systems. Apana also involves Swadhisthana Chakra and the Water Element
concerning the elimination of sexual liquids from the body (semen in men
and vaginal fluids in women) and the release of negative energy stored in the
subconscious mind as harmful emotions.
Samana Vayu

Operating from the navel region, between Prana and Apana Vayus,
Samana Vayu translates as "the balancing air." As Prana Vayu is the
inhalation and Apana is the exhalation, Samana is the time in between the
inhalation and exhalation. Samana Vayu deals with digestion, absorption,
assimilation and manifestation. It is associated with Hara, the Navel Chakra,
which is fueled by Manipura and Swadhisthana Chakras (the Fire and Water
Elements). Samana has a primary connection with the Fire Element, though,
since it operates in conjunction with Agni (the digestive fire) and is centred
in the stomach and small intestine.
Samana allows mental discrimination between useful and not useful
thoughts. It governs the liver, stomach, duodenum, spleen, and small and
large intestines. Samana (along with Agni) supplies the internal heat to
transform the food we eat into Pranic energy. This energy is then distributed
through the other Prana Vayus.
As Prana and Apana are the upward and downward-flowing energies,
Samana is the horizontal-flowing energy. All three, though, are said to
originate from Hara Chakra, which is essentially the storehouse of Prana in
the body.
Udana Vayu
Operating from the throat, head, and arms and legs, Udana Vayu is an
upwards-flowing energy that translates as "that which carries upwards." It is
associated with Vishuddhi and Ajna Chakras and the Spirit Element. While
Udana rises on inhalation, it circulates on the exhalation, nourishing the
neck, head, nervous and endocrine systems.
A healthy flow of Udana implies that a person is acting from a higher
source. This energy leads us to revitalize and transform our willpower and
become realized through the Spirit Element. Udana regulates growth,
intuition, memory, and speech. It governs all sensory and action organs,
including the hands and feet.
In The Upanishads, Prana Vayu is called the "in-breath," Apana the
"out-breath," Samana the "middle breath," and Udana the "up breath." Udana
is essentially an extension of Samana. Udana drives inhalation, which means
that it operates in conjunction with Prana Vayus. Both are upwards-flowing
energies, and both are of similar qualities since the Air Element (Prana) is
Spirit (Udana) on a lower, more manifest level. At the time of one’s death,
Udana is the energy that draws the individual consciousness out of the
physical body.

Vyana Vayu
Operating throughout the whole body as the coordinating energy of all
the Prana Vayus, Vyana Vayu translates as "outward moving air." Vyana is
the force that distributes Prana and causes it to flow. It governs the
circulatory system and the movement of joints and muscles. Unlike Samana,
which draws energy to the navel, Vyana moves energy outward to the body’s
boundary, expanding on the exhalation.
Most Yogic schools of thought say that Vyana Vayu is associated with
Sahasrara Chakra and the Spirit Element because it encompasses and
regulates all the Prana Vayus in the same way as Sahasrara is the source of
Light to all the Chakras below. However, there are other schools of thought
that say that Vyana Vayu corresponds with Swadhisthana Chakra and the
Water Element because it governs the circulation in the body. Nevertheless,
regardless of its origin and centre, Vyana Vayu encompasses all the Prana
Vayus and provides a sense of cohesion, integration and expansiveness for
the individual consciousness.

***
One of the most straightforward yet efficient ways to balance the Five
Prana Vayus is to practice Hand Mudras particular to each Vayu (Figure
130). In addition to increasing or decreasing the Elements that correspond
with each Vayu, each Hand Mudra has added benefits for the mind-body
complex. Refer to "Steps for Performing Hand Mudras" on page 344 for
instructions on their use.

Figure 130: Hand Mudras for the Five Prana Vayus

Prana and Apana
The two energies involved in the Kundalini awakening mechanism are
Prana and Apana. These two energies move through our bodies through the
Nadis. As mentioned, Prana is represented by the inhale, while Apana is
represented by the exhale. Prana and Apana never meet as each moves along
its path through the various energy channels.
By practising specific Kundalini Yoga techniques, we create the
potential for Prana and Apana to meet. The point at which this magical
meeting of Prana and Apana occurs is at Hara (Navel) Chakra, in the navel
region. Hara is a significant meeting point of many the energy channels in
the body since it is our energetic foundation, our core.
As far as raising the Kundalini is concerned, Prana is the "Vital Air"
above the Hara, while Apana is the "Vital Air" below it. The Seventy-Two
Thousand Nadis emanate from the Major Chakras and end in the hands and
the feet. Most of these Nadis are centred around the Heart Chakra and Hara
Chakra regions. Prana is carried to all parts of the body via the Nadis. Ida,
Pingala, and Sushumna are the most important of these energetic channels
since they transmit the most Prana.
The Ida channel begins at the base of the spine and ends in the left
nostril. Conversely, Pingala starts at the bottom of the spine and ends in the
right nostril. As mentioned, though, during the Kundalini awakening
process, Ida and Pingala terminate in the Pineal and Pituitary Glands. Ida
represents the Prana Vayu, while Apana represents the Pingala. The
ascension of the Kundalini corresponds with Udana. Samana represents
Sushumna. Samana's directional force has to transform for the Kundalini at
the base of the spine to awaken. Its development or transformation occurs
when Prana and Apana meet at Hara Chakra.
Through inhalation and retention, Prana can be directed down to the
Hara Chakra, while through exhalation and retention, Apana is drawn
upwards from the Root Chakra to the Hara. As these two energies meet at
Hara, Samana begins to change its movement. It no longer is moving away
from Hara horizontally but inwards instead, which creates a churning motion
exemplified in Figure 131.
During the transformation of Samana, heat begins to generate in the
Navel, called Tapas. This heat brings on an ecstatic feeling, likened to

euphoric sexual or sensual excitement; the "butterflies in the stomach" one
gets when they fall in love, which in this case are more like eagles. Another
comparable example is the feeling you get when you recognize the Spirit
within you and the immense bliss that accompanies it. For this reason, the
type of heat generated in Samana is described as white heat, not hot heat,
meaning it is a type of Spiritual rapture.
This intense heat creates pressure which acts on the Sushumna Nadi,
thereby activating it. The activation process energizes the Sushumna channel
in the spine, making it light up like a light bulb once it receives the necessary
electric power. These integrated energies then depart the Navel Chakra and
descend to the Root Chakra, thereby stimulating the Kundalini into activity
at the base of the spine. As such, the Kundalini begins its journey upwards
through the hollow tube of the spinal cord, piercing each of the Chakras as it
rises until it reaches the Crown.
Simultaneously, the Ida and Pingala channels rise on opposite sides of
Sushumna. They cross each other at each of the Chakric points until they
fuse in the Thalamus, which is where Sushumna ends as well. The Pineal
and Pituitary Glands also get activated during this process. The next
destination for all three channels is to rise as one stream of energy to the top
of the head at the Crown Chakra, blowing open the Thousand-Petalled
Lotus.

Figure 131: Redirecting the Flow of Prana, Apana, and Samana

Awakening the Kundalini
It is necessary to practice proper breath control and mental direction to
stir the Kundalini into activity and make it rise and activate the higher
centres of consciousness. The application of willpower is key to this process,
but so is knowledge since one needs a proven technique that works.
Before attempting to awaken the Kundalini, it is crucial to cleanse the
energetic channels and remove any negative energy and impurities in the
nerves. Otherwise, if the channels are blocked, Prana will be unable to move

through them, and the Kundalini will remain dormant. The techniques
employed in Yoga and Tantra work to accomplish this task and awaken the
Kundalini.
Yogic and Tantric teachings say that the combination of physical
exercises (Kriya/Asana), breathing techniques (Pranayama), energetic locks
(Bandha) and Mantra chanting can be used to cause Prana and Apana to
meet at Hara Chakra and stir the Kundalini into activity. To raise the
Kundalini energy through Sushumna, and Prana (Pingala) and Apana (Ida)
along the spine, one can apply hydraulic locks (Bandhas), which require the
conscious application of pressure in different parts of the body.
Applying pressure in Muladhara Chakra (Mula Bandha) sends the
Kundalini and Prana and Apana energies up to Swadhisthana Chakra. Next,
one needs to apply a Bandha in the diaphragm (Uddiyana Bandha), which
will send the three energies upwards to the Throat Chakra. From there, the
Neck Lock (Jalandhara Bandha) takes the energies into the brain. Applying
all three locks simultaneously is called Maha Bandha (Figure 132).

Figure 132: Maha Bandha: Applying the Three Bandhas
The Pineal Gland is connected to the Ida Nadi, while the Pituitary
Gland is connected to Pingala. As the Kundalini is rising, the Pineal Gland
begins to transmit a beam of radiation and project it towards the Pituitary
Gland. The Pituitary thus becomes aroused and projects pulses or flashes of
Light towards the Pineal Gland. Once the Kundalini enters the brain through
Sushumna, Ida and Pingala cross each other one final time at the Thalamus,
where they fuse as opposites. This process awakens Ajna Chakra, activating
it entirely, which results in a mystic marriage between the Pineal and
Pituitary Glands.
As Ida, Pingala and Sushumna unify as one stream of energy in the
Thalamus centre, the gate to Sahasrara becomes open. The Kundalini can
then rise to the top of the head and complete its journey. The Soul, which

had its seat at the Pineal Gland, leaves the physical body, and a permanent
expansion of consciousness occurs.

SUSHUMNA AND BRAHMARANDHRA
Sushumna is the central Nadi that passes through the hollow tube in the
spinal column. Its flow begins at the base, at Muladhara Chakra, ending in
Sahasrara Chakra at the Crown. Once it enters the head, Sushumna Nadi
splits into two streams (at the Thalamus). One stream moves towards the
front of the head, past Ajna Chakra as it activates it. It continues moving
alongside the front of the head, just within the skull, before reaching
Brahmarandhra, the seat of supreme consciousness, located at the top-centre
of the head.
The second stream moves towards the back of the head, alongside but
just inside the skull, before reaching Brahmarandhra. Both of these energy
streams meet at Brahmarandhra, thereby piercing it, resulting in the Cosmic
Egg opening, which is the summit directly above it.
In Sanskrit, Brahmarandhra means the "hole or aperture of Brahman."
According to Yogic texts, Brahmarandhra is the opening of the Sushumna
Nadi at the head's crown. Brahman refers to the Cosmic Spirit in Sanskrit. It
connotes the highest Universal Principle, the ultimate reality of the Universe.
When one raises the Kundalini energy to Brahmarandhra, they
experience a Spiritual awakening of the highest degree. Brahmarandhra and
the Cosmic Egg both relate to the Cosmic energy, and the act of breaking
through this centre is the awakening of the Spiritual, Divine Self.
Although both serve to liberate the Soul from the body according to
sacred texts, it is unclear whether Brahmarandhra and the Cosmic Egg are
one and the same. However, from my extensive research into this topic,
coupled with my Kundalini awakening experience, I have concluded that
piercing Brahmarandhra with enough force begins the process of breaking
the Cosmic Egg. In other words, it is a one-two step process.
Further clues are given to us by the Shiva Linga which contains an eggshaped cylinder that is said to represent the Brahmanda, whose meaning in
Sanskrit is "the Cosmic Egg." Brahma refers to the Cosmos, while "anda"
means "egg." Brahmanda is a Universal symbol of the source of the entire
Cosmos. The Cosmic Egg is one of the most prominent icons in world
mythology that we can find in many Ancient traditions. In almost all cases, a
Divine Being resides in the Cosmic Egg who creates himself from nothing
and then goes on to create the material Universe.

On its upwards rise, when the Kundalini reaches the top of the head and
pierces Brahmarandhra, the Cosmic Egg breaks, and the "yolk" which is
sublimated Pranic energy, pours over the body, resulting in the full activation
of the Body of Light and the Seventy-Two Thousand Nadis. This experience
is akin to inheriting Spiritual "wings," which enable you to travel in the inner
Cosmic Planes via the optimised Merkaba. Therefore, breaking the Cosmic
Egg results in one becoming an Angelic Being themselves.

Figure 133: The Brahmarandhra

Brahmarandhra's location is between the two parietal and occipital
bones, more specifically in the area of the anterior fontanelle (Figure 133).
In a baby, this part of the head is very soft. As the child grows up, the
Brahmarandhra closes up with the growth of the bones of the skull. All
grown humans are tasked with raising the Kundalini energy into the head
and piercing Brahmarandhra if we desire to attain liberation from death. By
penetrating Brahmarandhra through a Kundalini activation, we become one
with the Spirit as Eternal Beings of Light.
According to The Upanishads, once Sushumna pierces the head and
goes through the Brahmarandhra, the Yogi attains immortality. The
Microcosm and Macrocosm become One, and the Yogi attains illumination.
Before this occurs, though, the Body of Light is fully activated, as the
Seventy-Two Thousand Nadis are infused with Pranic energy. This process
is very intense since the Body of Light experiences getting charged up by
what feels like an external energy source. I describe the process as feeling
like you are getting electrocuted by a high voltage power line, minus the
physical pain, of course.
In my personal experience, once I opened my physical eyes during the
Kundalini activation process, I saw my hands and other parts of my body as
pure golden Light as if I had undergone a biological transformation.
Furthermore, the room I was in appeared Holographic since the objects
around me became semi-transparent and seemingly suspended in mid-air.
And this was not a momentary vision but one that I held for over five
seconds with my cognitive functions fully operational before the infused
energy that now took over my body threw me back onto the bed.
Once Shakti unites with Shiva, the supreme consciousness, the Veil of
Maya is pierced, and you can perceive the infinite, living Mind of God.
Verily it is true, the nature of our reality is the by-product of the union of
energy and consciousness.
While the energy continued rising upwards, even past Brahmarandhra
and the Cosmic Egg, my consciousness began entirely leaving my physical
body. It felt like I was being sucked out of my body and ceasing to exist. At
the apex of this experience, I was at the onset of being united with the White
Light. Considering that Brahmarandhra is the centre of energy and
consciousness, some people believe that if you go beyond it, you may not be
able to return to the physical body. This idea is purely theoretical, but a
possibility exists regardless. In other words, had I allowed myself to unite

with the White Light during my very intense Kundalini rising experience, I
may not have been able to come back to the physical body. The experience
was just too intense on every level, and there were many unknown variables,
especially since I had no prior knowledge of the Kundalini at that point in
my life.
Sushumna Nadi has three layers or lesser Nadis that comprise it. Once
the Cosmic Egg is broken, Kundalini energy from Sushumna Nadi continues
to rise upwards still until the Thousand-Petals of Sahasrara Chakra are
opened fully. You have to allow yourself to let go and not try to control the
energy as it continues rising upwards. Each of the three Sushumna Nadis or
layers have to do its part to make this happen. Once it is complete, the head
opens up like a flower. Comprising the symbolic flower are three layers, as
portrayed in Figure 134. Those three layers represent the fully awakened
Sahasrara Chakra. As such, the human becomes an antenna to the vibrations
from the outside.
Sushumna Nadi has an outer layer traditionally considered a brilliant
red colour, symbolic of the Kundalini Fire that flows through it. Since the
Sushumna Nadi splits into two streams within the head, front and back, it
governs the entire middle part of the head.
Sushumna’s first layer is called Vajrini or Vajra Nadi. This Nadi starts
at the Ajna Chakra and ends in the gonads (testes in men and ovaries in
women). Its colour is gold, as it exhibits the nature of Rajas or activity. This
layer is the Sun (Surya) Nadi which contains masculine energy that works
outside the Sushumna as the Pingala Nadi and within it as the Vajrini. It is
believed that Vajrini can be poisonous or toxic.

Figure 134: Sushumna Nadi Layers and the Cosmic Egg
The second layer is called Chitrini or Chitra Nadi. Silver-white in
colour, this Nadi reflects the nature of the Moon (Chandra). It connects us to
dreams and visions and is of prime importance to awakened painters or
poets. Chitrini exhibits the character of Sattva, which relates to
transcendence. It starts in the Bindu Chakra and ends in the Svayambhu
lingam in Muladhara. The Chitra Nadi connects to the Chakric stems within
the spinal cord. This feminine Nadi works outside of Sushumna as the Ida
Nadi and within it as the Chitrini. Chitrini is said to end in Brahmadvara, the
door or entrance into Brahma, the Creator. Through the Chitra Nadi, the

Kundalini travels to its final resting place within the Seventh Eye, otherwise
called Soma Chakra.
The innermost layer is the Brahma Nadi, which is directly related to
Brahmarandhra. Brahma Nadi is the stream of purity and the deep essence of
the Kundalini energy. When awakened, it energizes the Chakras, infusing
them with the Kundalini Light. To have a full awakening, though, you must
raise the Kundalini through Brahma Nadi and pierce Brahmarandhra.
Anything less than that is not a complete awakening but a partial one.

LALANA CHAKRA AND AMRITA NECTAR
In the Tantra Yoga tradition, it is said that the Bindu Chakra is the point
that manifests your entire physical body as well as its point of dissipation. It
says that the Bindu holds our Life Force within it, producing the Amrita
Nectar. The Amrita Nectar is produced through a synthesis of Light energy
one gets from food. In non-Kundalini awakened people, the Amrita drips
from the Bindu down to the third Chakra, Manipura, where it is used up for
various activities of the body. It gives the body vitality. Over time, the
Bindu's Life Force begins to dissipate, thereby ageing the physical body. The
skin becomes rougher and dryer, hair begins to fall out, bone tissue and
cartilage wear out, and overall vitality lessens.
Yogis say that if one can prevent the Amrita from getting burned up by
the Solar Plexus Chakra, they can enjoy its vitalizing and nourishing nectar
and stop and even reverse the process of ageing and degeneration of the
physical body. To accomplish this, Yogis must stimulate a secret Minor
Chakra called Lalana. In The Upanishads, Lalana is said to have 12 brightred petals. Other sacred texts, though, say it has 64 silvery-white petals.
Lalana is a mysterious Chakra, but a critical one, especially in the
Kundalini awakened individuals. Utilizing the power of Lalana and
Vishuddhi enables one to transform the Amrita into a more fine, Spiritual
substance, which is used to energize and nourish the Kundalini circuit.
Synthesized Light energy one gets from food that I have said "feeds" the
Kundalini circuit, providing the experience of transcendence is the Amrita
Nectar spoken of in Yogic traditions. Amrita becomes optimized when it is
harnessed and transformed into what I describe feels like a liquid Spirit
energy. This cooling substance soothes the mind and heart, removing and
washing away any unbalanced thoughts and emotions.
Lalana is a red circular Moon region, which acts as a reservoir for the
Amrita nectar. As the Amrita falls from the Bindu, it is stored at Lalana
Chakra, ready to be purified by Vishuddhi. If Vishuddhi is inactive, as it is in
most non-Kundalini awakened individuals, Amrita falls to Manipura. But if
Lalana is somehow stimulated, Vishuddhi becomes active as well. The
nectar is thus purified and transformed, becoming the "Nectar of
Immortality." As mentioned before, Ancient traditions have referred to this
nectar as the "Elixir of Life" and the "Food of the Gods." In Christianity, it is

the "Blood of the Christ" that grants Eternal Life. Once the necessary energy
centres are opened, the transformed Amrita nectar is then redistributed
throughout the Body of Light, enabling the individual to experience true
transcendence.
Lalana Chakra is located at the backside of the palate, more
specifically, the area where the top of the spinal cord meets the brainstem. In
the cross-section of the human brain and skull (Figure 135), its location is
between the Medulla Oblongata and the base of the skull, along the spinal
cord’s central canal. This area is where the Vagus nerve and other cranial
nerves join the first cervical vertebra (Atlas).
Lalana Chakra is about two inches above Vishuddhi and is intimately
connected with it. Lalana, which means both "female energy" and "tongue,"
is also called Talu Chakra, and it is located directly behind the pharynx, at
the back of the mouth. The Kundalini energy activates Lalana Chakra as it
enters the brainstem. Once it is activated, the Kundalini will then proceed
towards the Thalamus, where it will work on opening Ajna next, followed by
Sahasrara.

Figure 135: Lalana (Talu) Chakra and the Bindu Visarga
Lalana is also connected to the Bindu at the top-back of the head. Along
with Vishuddhi, these three Chakras are responsible for what happens to the
Amrita and whether it falls downwards to Manipura, leading to physical
degradation, or whether it is harnessed and utilized for Spiritual purposes.
Lalana Chakra's powers are best-made use of once the Kundalini has blown
open this Chakric centre, but there is another method that Yogis have
developed called Khechari Mudra.

Khechari Mudra and its Variations

Yogis have discovered that they can affect the flow of Amrita from their
Bindu with the help of the tongue. Falling under the heading of "Mana: Head
Mudras," Khechari Mudra is a powerful technique that uses the tongue to
channel energy in the brain. It involves turning the tip of the tongue
backwards and attempting to touch the uvula or "little tongue," which directs
the flow of energy towards Lalana Chakra.
The tongue is very potent in terms of directing energy into the brain. In
Qi Gong, it is essential to put the tip of your tongue on the sensitive area of
the roof of your mouth to connect two very important energy Meridians. The
end of your tongue is an energy conductor that stimulates whatever it
touches. In the case of Khechari Mudra, you are trying to direct the energy
flow backwards into Lalana Chakra to activate it.

Figure 136: Basic Khechari Mudra
To perform the Basic Khechari Mudra method, you can sit in any
comfortable meditative position. With eyes closed, turn your eyes towards
the Mind’s Eye centre between the eyebrows. Then, with the mouth closed,
roll the tongue upward and backwards so that its lower surface touches the

upper palate (Figure 136). Stretch the tip of the tongue as far as it will go as
you attempt to touch the uvula. There should not be too much strain on the
tongue as you do this. Keep it in this position now as long as it is
comfortable. If you experience discomfort, relax the tongue by returning it to
its neutral position for a few seconds, then repeat the practice.
Khechari Mudra is performed as part of different Asanas, Pranayamas,
Mudras, and Bandhas for optimal effects of those exercises. When utilized
with the inverted pose, Viparita Karani, it enables the practitioner to retain
the Amrita more easily.

Figure 137: Advanced Khechari Mudra
The Advanced Khechari Mudra involves cutting the bottom of the
tissue that connects the underside of the tongue with the bottom of the
mouth. Once completed, the tongue can be elongated fully and placed inside
the nasal cavity behind the uvula (Figure 137). Doing so puts pressure on the
pharynx, which stimulates Lalana and prevents the Amrita from falling to
the Solar Plexus. Once Amrita is captured with Khechari Mudra, its healing

effects begin to unfold. The Advanced Khechari Mudra method is best
practised with the help of a qualified Guru.
When a person undergoes a full and permanent Kundalini awakening,
there is a free-flow of Kundalini energy into the Thalamus. From here, the
Kundalini flows towards Ajna, Sahasrara, and the Bindu. When the Bindu
Chakra becomes involved in the process of Spiritual transformation, it
secretes the Amrita down to Lalana Chakra, which is then purified by
Vishuddhi and transformed into its most refined form. This nectar is then
distributed throughout the Body of Light, nourishing the Seventy-Two
Thousand Nadis and expanding the consciousness. As a result, the awakened
person begins to have above-average vitality, and their ageing process slows
down drastically. They can go for a long time without food and water, as
they feel nourished from the inside by the movement of these new energies.
The Amrita nectar is directly involved in the process of Enlightenment.
Although we can utilize it through the Yogic practices mentioned above, its
real purpose is to play a role in sustaining the Kundalini circuit. The
transformed Amrita nectar nourishes the Kundalini circuit, and it relies on
the Light energy it gets from food. It provides the emotional tranquillity
necessary for one to suspend the ageing process and prolong the health of
their physical body. This emotional tranquillity is best described as a state of
Nirvana which is one of the sought-after goals of the Yogi. Stress is one of
the key factors in ageing. By putting the mind in neutral and utilizing the
Amrita nectar to nourish the Body of Light, longevity can be attained.
Over the years, I have discovered another variation of the Khechari
Mudra that has become one of the dominant practices in my life. I have
found that curving the tongue downwards and pushing it back also puts
pressure on Lalana Chakra, which aids in the process of nourishing my
Kundalini circuit with the transformed Amrita. To do it correctly, you must
touch the tip of the tongue to the Frenulum, which is a fold of mucus
membrane located under the centre portion of the tongue that helps anchor it
in your mouth and stabilize its movements.
I stumbled upon this technique accidentally, or to be more accurate; it is
my Higher Self that led me to find this technique and utilize it. I have never
come across this practice in my research of various Spiritual traditions to
verify its use, so what I am sharing with you is unique information you
won’t find elsewhere.

I started practising this technique years ago, seemingly out of nowhere,
and often catch myself doing it in front of other people, which sometimes
gets a strange reaction from them since I naturally purse my lips when I do
it. The front cover of The Magus features a younger me as Hermes,
portrayed with pursed lips as I am performing this technique. My wife
thought it fitting to depict me like this since she often sees me doing it.
The technique I discovered allows me to harness the Light energy I get
from food, which turns into a liquid Spirit substance (Amrita) in my brain
and is then redistributed along the many Nadis in my Body of Light. It is
always accompanied by feelings of warmth like I am kindling a steady fire
in my chest, as is the case when Lalana Chakra is being stimulated. Now,
keep in mind that the tongue is facing downwards with this variation, which
often makes me question its use and to what extent it is benefiting me
Spiritually. So, I like to balance it out by performing the Basic Khechari
Mudra by turning the tip of the tongue backwards and touching the upper
palate. This way, I get the necessary energies streaming upwards into the
Cerebrum while keeping Lalana Chakra stimulated.

MANTRA
Mantra is a Sanskrit word that means "a tool of the mind" or "an
instrument of thought." It is a sacred pronouncement, a Divine sound,
syllable, word, or grouping of words in a sacred language with Magickal
power in the invisible world. Mantras are "words of power" that are found in
many different Spiritual traditions, Ancient and modern, that serve as tools
to invoke or evoke energy into the Aura. Since "manas" means "mind" in
Sanskrit, a Mantra’s purpose is to transcend the mind. They include but are
not limited to the names of Gods, Angels, Spirits, and different Deities from
whatever pantheon your chosen Mantra belongs to.
I have already introduced you to the science of Mantras in my previous
book, most of which are in the Hebrew language and are used as part of
Ceremonial Magick ritual exercises. The Mantras in the Enochian language
are stand-alone Mantras that are the phonetic recitation of passages in
Enochian. Because of the sacredness and power of Hebrew and Enochian
languages, these Mantras are potent in changing one's consciousness through
the invocation/evocation of energy.
There are 84 meridian points on the roof of the mouth, which the
tongue stimulates by chanting a Mantra. These meridian points, in turn,
stimulate the Hypothalamus, which acts on the Pineal Gland, making it pulse
and radiate. The Pineal Gland then gives impulses to the entire Endocrine
system, enabling the release of hormones that strengthen our immune and
neurological systems, putting the body in a state of coherence. Two of the
released hormones are serotonin and dopamine, which create emotional bliss
that raises one's consciousness to a higher level.
The Mantras I will be presenting in this book are in the Sanskrit
language, one of the world's oldest languages (5000 years old). Sanskrit is
the Ancient language of Hinduism that was a means of communication and
dialogue by the Hindu Celestial Gods, according to legend. Ancient Hindus
referred to Sanskrit as "Dev Bhasha" or "Devavani," meaning the "Language
of the Gods."
The greatness of the Sanskrit language is in the formation and
uniqueness of its vocabulary, phonology, grammar, and syntax, which
remains undiluted in its purity to this day. Its fifty letters are comprised of

sixteen vowels and thirty-four consonants. Sanskrit letters have never been
altered or tweaked throughout time, making it a perfect language for word
formation and pronunciation.
Sanskrit Mantras use seed sounds that create the vibratory energy of the
words they translate to. By pronouncing a Sanskrit Mantra, its vibration
impacts your consciousness which has lasting effects on your mind and
body. Therefore, understanding the meaning of a Sanskrit Mantra is
paramount to knowing the kind of energetic change it will produce.
The Mantras presented in this section are to be vibrated using your
vocal cords in a projective, energizing tone. They should be performed in
monotone, natural C, elongating the pronunciation. If you have ever heard
Tibetan monks chant, it is to sound similar to that. Vibrating and "chanting"
are interchangeable words when it comes to the performance of a Mantra.

The Sacred Number 108
The standard repetition of a Mantra in many Eastern Spiritual traditions
is 108 times. This number is the basis of all Creation, representing the
Universe and our existence. Hindus, Yogis, and Buddhists believe that by
vibrating/chanting a Mantra 108 times, we align ourselves to the Will of the
Creator and its creative energy. They think that by harmonizing our personal
vibration with the Universal one, we assume our birthright as Co-Creators,
enabling us to manifest whatever reality we desire.
There are many reasons why the number 108 is considered sacred,
some found in science and mathematics. For example, the Sun is 108 times
the diameter of the Earth, and the distance from the Earth to the Sun is 108
times the Sun's diameter. Also, the distance from the Earth to the Moon is
108 times the diameter of the Moon.
In Astrology, there are twelve Zodiacal Constellations and nine Planets
(Seven Ancient Planets plus Uranus and Neptune) in our Solar System.
Therefore, twelve multiplied by nine equals 108. Additionally, there are
twenty-seven Lunar mansions which are divided into four quarters. When
you multiply twenty-seven by four, the result again is 108.
In the Hindu religion, there are 108 Upanishads, which are the sacred
texts of wisdom passed down by the Ancient rishis. Each Deity in Hinduism
also has 108 names, whose qualities or powers we can invoke through their
respective Mantras.

In the Sanskrit alphabet, since there are 54 letters and each letter has a
masculine (Shiva) and feminine (Shakti) quality, the total number of
variations equals 108. In the Yogic system of Chakras, as well, there are
believed to be 108 energy lines (Nadis) that converge at the Heart Chakra,
our Body of Light’s centre of love and transformation.
In Ayurvedic medicine, there are said to be 108 vital energy points in
the body, called Marmas. Working with the Marmas is beneficial to
improving our psychological and physiological states. By chanting a Mantra
108 times, we send Divine energy to each Marma point, activating its
healing properties.
The holy writings of Tibetan Buddhists also, have been divided into
108 sacred books. In addition, Buddhists believe that the road to Nirvana is
paved with exactly 108 temptations. They believe that 108 defilements, or
sins, prevent us from living in a perfect, peaceful state.
These are just some of the reasons why the number 108 is sacred. There
are many more across not only Eastern religions and Spiritual traditions, but
Western ones as well. For example, the number 108 is used in Islam to refer
to God. And so on.

Japa Meditation
Traditionally, a Mala bead necklace is used in the traditions of Yoga,
Buddhism, Hinduism, Jainism, and Sikhism as part of Mantra practice,
which they refer to as a Japa meditation. A Mala has 108 beads and one
"Guru" bead, which is used as a marker for the start and end of a cycle. So
whether you are chanting out loud or reciting silently, tracing the beads of
the Mala with your fingers will help you keep track of your Mantra. Similar
implements have been used for generations cross-culturally and across many
religions and Spiritual traditions, including the rosary beads used by
Christians for prayer.
To perform a Japa meditation, you must obtain a Mala bead necklace to
be used with the Mantras presented below. Not only will a Mala allow you to
complete 108 repetitions with ease, but it will become a powerful Spiritual
item in your life that puts you in the right frame of mind the moment you
hold it in your hand.
However, one can work with meditation Mantras without a Mala, so if
you can’t get one for some reason, don’t be deterred from practising Mantras
without it. As mentioned before, vibrating/chanting Mantras has a

cumulative effect in terms of energy invoked/evoked, so whether you do 108
pronouncements or 100, for example, the outcome will be relatively
negligible. Technically, you can even focus on performing a Mantra for a
certain amount of time, as in five to fifteen minutes, and time yourself
accordingly so you do approximately 100 pronouncements. Having said that,
I do believe in the power of traditional practice, especially one with
thousands of years of lineage, so before you start tweaking its mechanics, it
is better to master its original form and go from there.
Ideally, do your meditation Mantra early in the morning, before eating.
If you wish to repeat your Mantra, do so at night, allowing some time
between sessions so that the invoked/evoked energy can work on you.
To begin your Japa practice, choose your meditation Mantra from the
options given below. Each meditation Mantra affects our energy differently,
so read its description carefully so that you can apply each one when needed.
Next, find a spot to sit comfortably with your spine straight and eyes closed.
One of the meditation Asanas presented so far is ideal. Take a few deep
breaths now to align yourself with your intention.
Hold your Mala in your right hand (In India, the left hand is considered
impure), draped over your middle finger, as your index finger comfortably
extends out (Figure 138). Starting at the Guru bead, use your thumb to count
each smaller bead as you pull the Mala towards you with each Mantra
pronouncement. Inhale before each pronouncement in a calm and rhythmic
fashion.

Figure 138: Counting Mala Beads
You are to repeat your Mantra 108 times as you cycle through the Mala
beads, finishing at the Guru bead where you started. If you wish to continue
your Mantra meditation, reverse the direction and begin the process again
instead of passing over the Guru bead. Remember to do complete 108
cycles.
Repetition of Sanskrit Mantras positively affects your nervous system,
leaving you calm and relaxed, which is one of the initial side-effects. In
addition, these Mantras balance your inner energies, which improves
concentration and Self-awareness. However, regular repetition of Sanskrit
Mantras works at a deep, subconscious level, creating lasting healing effects
on the mind, body, and Soul. Therefore, when you begin this practice, be
patient and consistent with it daily to obtain the desired results over time.

Meditation Mantras

ॐ
Om
Pronunciation: Aaa-Uuu-Mmm
"Om" is the most universal Mantra in Sanskrit. It is believed to be the
first sound heard at the creation of the Cosmos from which all things
emerge. "Om" signifies the essence of the ultimate reality, which is Cosmic
Consciousness. As such, most Sanskrit Mantras start or end with "Om".
"Om" (pronounced AUM) represents the cycle of life—life, death, and
rebirth. It also relates to the Hindu Trinity (Trimurti) of Brahma, Vishnu, and
Shiva. "Aaa" represents creation, "Ooo" stands for maintenance or
preservation, and "Mmm" is destruction, with relation to overcoming the
Ego to achieve Self-realization. Finally, AUM represents the Three Gunas of
nature and the four stages of consciousness; the fourth stage represents
silence of the mind achieved when the practitioner reaches Samadhi.
Chanting Aaa-Uuu-Mmm (AUM) will help you disconnect from your
Ego and reconnect with the Spirit within, which is all-creative and allencompassing. When you pronounce each syllable fully, you will feel energy
lifting from your pelvic floor through to the heart, and finally, the crown of
the head. It is the path of the Kundalini, whose purpose is to liberate the Soul
from the body in this lifetime.
The sound "Om" vibrates at the 432 Hz vibration frequency, found
throughout everything in nature. As such, this sound heals the mind and
body at a cellular level, bringing us in tune with our surroundings. It
removes all tension and anxiety by calming the mind and harmonizing our
inner energies. It also helps improve concentration while enhancing
creativity and overall positive energy.
On a physical level, "Om" improves lung function and the digestive
system while detoxifying the body. When pronouncing Aaa-Ooo-Mmm, the
three unique frequencies should flow naturally as one sound.

ॐ नमः शिवाय
Om Namah Shivaya
Pronunciation: Aummm Nah-Mahhh Shee-Vah-Yahhh

"Om Namah Shivaya" translates to "O salutations to the auspicious
one," or simply, "I bow to Lord Shiva." This widely used Mantra draws the
mind in upon itself to Lord Shiva’s infinite, all-pervasive presence—the
Cosmic Consciousness principle of the Universe. It is also called "Shiva
Panchakshara," meaning the "Five-Syllable Mantra," the essential Mantra in
Shaivism that brings silence to the mind.
The five syllables "Namah Shivaya" represent the Five Elements that
make up all of Creation: "Na" sound represents Earth, "Ma" is Water, "Shi"
means Fire, "Va" is Air, and "Ya" represents Spirit. The "Om" is excluded as
it is the first sound of the Universe that stands for peace and love, the
energetic foundation of Cosmic Consciousness.
As Shiva is the supreme God of transformation who represents our
Higher Self, this Mantra raises our consciousness by harmonizing the Five
Elements within the Self. Thus, not only does it bring joy and bliss into our
lives, but it also connects us with all of nature, namely the physical
representation of the Five Elements that Shiva symbolizes—the land, the
sea, the air, and the Sun.
Because it connects us with our Holy Guardian Angel, our God-Self,
the Om Namah Shivaya Mantra is said to overcome the effects of the
Macrocosm—the fixed Stars and the orbiting Planets that subtly affect us on
an energetic level. It builds up transcendental energy in our system that
raises consciousness, enabling us to experience the higher Cosmic Planes.
As such, this Mantra connects us with the highest Chakra, Sahasrara—the
source of all of Creation.

ॐ मणि पद्मे हूँ
Om Mani Padme Hum
Pronunciation: Aummm Mah-neee Pahd-mayyy Hummm
This Sanskrit Mantra is associated with Avalokiteshvara (Sanskrit), the
Bodhisattva of compassion. Bodhisattvas are Enlightened, compassionate
Beings who assist the Spiritual goals of others. Tibetan Buddhists refer to
this same Being as Chenrezig, while the Chinese call it Quan Yin. The
regular practice of this Mantra instils a sense of love and kindness towards
ourselves and others, which liberates us from the emotional suffering of our
mundane existence.
The translation of this Mantra would be "Praise to the Jewel in the
Lotus." The jewel itself refers to compassion which purifies the Soul,

bestowing it with the bliss of Divine Light. Just as the lotus is not soiled by
the mud in which it grows, human beings can use compassion to rise above
the oppression of the Lower Self, the Ego, and achieve Enlightenment.
"Om Mani Padme Hum" can be broken down into six syllables, which
represent a gradual and progressive path from the mundane into the
Spiritual: "Om" is the primal sound of the Universe that brings us in
harmony with the Cosmos, "Ma" is our altruistic intention to develop ethics
and morals which purifies jealous tendencies, "Ni" builds tolerance and
patience, releasing us from our lower desires and leaving us peaceful and
content, "Pad" frees us from prejudice and ignorance which bar the way to
love and acceptance, and "Me" releases us from attachment and
possessiveness, allowing us to cultivate our powers of concentration. Finally,
"Hum" liberates us from aggression and hatred, as it represents the unity of
all things that opens the door to wisdom and understanding.
The Dalai Lama, whom the Buddhists believe is the current incarnation
of Chenrezig, says that every one of the Buddha’s teachings resides within
this powerful Mantra. To unlock it, however, one must not only chant it but
must focus their intention on the meaning behind each of the six syllables.

हरे कृष्ण हरे कृष्ण |
कृष्ण कृष्ण हरे हरे |
हरे राम हरे राम | राम राम हरे
हरे
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare
Pronunciation: Huh-ray Krish-Naaa, Huh-ray Krish-Naaa, Krish-Naaa
Krish-Naaa, Huh-ray Huh-rayyy, Huh-ray Ramaaa, Huh-ray Ramaaa, Rama
Ramaaa, Huh-ray Huh-rayyy
The Hare Krishna Mantra, also known as the "Maha," or "Great"
Mantra, is a sacred Sanskrit verse whose purpose is to revive God-realization
within oneself, known as Krishna consciousness. It is rooted in the
Vaishnava tradition of Hinduism and is central to the path of Bhakti Yoga. It
has only four lines, composed of Hindu deities' names: Hare, Krishna, and
Rama. Hare combines the energy of Hari (Lord Vishnu) and Hara (Krishna's

consort, Shakti), while Krishna and Rama are the names of the two avatars,
or Divine incarnations, of Lord Vishnu.
Lord Krishna has many parallels to Jesus Christ as both are believed to
be sons of God who were fully human and fully Divine. Both teachings
emphasised love and peace since their mission was to restore goodness in a
morally declining world. By attempting to achieve Krishna Consciousness
within ourselves, we refer to Christ Consciousness—a state of awareness in
which individuals act in complete harmony with the Divine. This state of
consciousness is a precursor, or preparation (in a sense), to reaching Cosmic
Consciousness.
The practice of the Maha Mantra activates Spiritual energy within you
in the Heart Chakra, whose aim is to transform your consciousness so you
can transcend your Ego. The subtle state of awareness that is achieved frees
the Self from the illusion of separateness, allowing love energy to take over
and harmonise the mind, body, and Soul. As such, Krishna consciousness is
achieved, preparing the way for joy and bliss to permanently enter your life.

ॐ
शान्तिः
शान्तिः

शान्तिः

Om Shanti Shanti Shanti
Pronunciation: Aummm Shanteee Shanteee Shanteee
The "Om Shanti" Mantra is commonly used in Hindu and Buddhist
prayers, ceremonies, and literature; its meaning translates to "Om Peace."
"Shanti" comes from the Sanskrit root word "sham," meaning calmness,
tranquillity, prosperity, and happiness. It is the root of the word "Shalom" in
Hebrew and "Salam" in Arabic, both of which also means "Peace." By
chanting this Mantra, not only do you find a profound level of peace within
yourself, but you are sending out offerings of peace to the whole world.
Traditionally, the word "Shanti" is chanted three times since it invokes
peace and protection on three levels of Self: conscious, subconscious, and
superconscious (God-Self). The conscious Self belongs to the Earth, while
the subconscious reaches down into the Underworld (Hell), and the
superconscious refers to the Heavens (Stars) above. These three can again be
broken down into the body, mind, and Spirit or the Physical, Astral, and
Spiritual Planes.

"Om Shanti" can also be used as a form of greeting in Yoga. When said
aloud to a fellow practitioner, it is a desire for the other person to experience
Universal peace. The English translation would be "Peace be with you," or
"Namaste"—although the words sound different, the meaning is the same.
Be mindful when pronouncing "Shanti" to press the tongue against the teeth
instead of on the upper palate—the produced sound "t" should sound
different from the English version of "t."

ॐ नमो गुरु देव् नमो
Ong Namo Guru Dev Namo
Pronunciation: Onggg Nah-Moh Guh-Ruh Devvv Nah-Moh
This Sanskrit Mantra translates to "I bow to the Creative Wisdom, I
bow to the Divine Teacher within." Another translation is "I bow to the AllThat-Is," as a Mantra of Oneness. Its other name is the "Adi Mantra," which
is often used in Kundalini Yoga at the beginning of its practice, especially in
a class setting. It was essential to Yogi Bhajan, the Hindu Spiritual teacher
who brought Kundalini Yoga to the West. Many practitioners believe that the
Adi Mantra allows one to tune into Kundalini Yoga's particular vibration
frequency, unlocking its most profound understanding and purpose.
Chanting this Mantra enables us to humble ourselves and connect with
our Higher Self—the inner teacher that channels Universal wisdom and
knowledge to us when our minds are in a receptive state. It raises the
vibration of our consciousness, allowing us to trust and listen to our inner
guidance. It also imparts to us that we are our own greatest teachers in life
and that no other teachers are needed.
The "Ong Namo Guru Dev Namo" Mantra enables us to tap into our
highest potential as Spiritual human beings. Each word's translation reveals
its power to transform our consciousness. To start, "Ong" means infinite
creative energy or subtle Divine wisdom. Its pronouncement is similar to
saying "Om," with the added advantage of moving the sound in the mouth
from the front to the back of the throat, which stimulates different brain
parts, especially the Pituitary and Pineal Glands.
"Namo" is equivalent to "Namaha," meaning "my respectful
salutations," while a Guru is a Spiritual teacher who guides their disciples on
their path towards Enlightenment. "Dev" is a shorter version of the term
"Deva," a Sanskrit word for God or Deity. As Deva follows Guru in the

Mantra, it implies that the Spiritual teacher is Divine and Holy. And finally,
"Namo" at the end reaffirms humility and reverence.
This Mantra refines the energy around and within us, making us a
vessel for higher consciousness. By chanting it, one has the wisdom and
support of generations of Kundalini Yogis while reinforcing one's connection
to their Higher, God-Self.

ॐ गं गणपतये नमः
Om Gam Ganapataye Namaha
Pronunciation: Aummm Gummm Guh-Nuh-Puh-Tuh-Yehhh Nah-MahHaaa
"Om Gam Ganapataye Namaha" is a powerful prayer and Mantra that
praises the beloved Hindu elephant-headed God, Lord Ganesha. Its English
translation is "My Salutations to Lord Ganesha." In Hinduism, Lord Ganesha
is recognized as the remover of obstacles and master of knowledge. He is
known to give good luck, prosperity, and success, especially when
undertaking a new venture.
Lord Ganesha is associated with Muladhara Chakra and the Earth
Element. He is often invoked to clear one’s path when they feel mentally
stuck and are in need of a change of perspective. His energy grounds us,
helping us overcome challenges and creative blockages. Lord Ganesha
empowers us by improving our focus, concentration, and knowledge,
facilitating inner peace.
The sound "Gam" is a Bija Mantra for Ganesha, while "Ganapataye" is
a reference to his other name—Ganapati. It is said that if one chants the Lord
Ganesha Mantra 108 times on a daily basis, all fear and negativity from their
hearts will be removed. This is because fear is a by-product of the corrupted
Water and Air Elements, which the Earth Element grounds when it is
brought in.

ॐ श्री सरस्वत्यै नमः
Om Shri Saraswataya Namaha
Pronunciation: Aummm Shree Sah-Rah-Swah-Tah-Yahhh Nah-Mah-Haaa
The "Om Shri Saraswataya Namaha" Mantra invokes the power of the
Hindu Goddess, Saraswati (Figure 139), who is associated with wisdom,

learning, and the creative arts. The English translation reads, "Salutations to
the Goddess Saraswati." Chanting this Mantra stimulates one’s creativity
while kindling the intellect. Moreover, it inspires us to express ourselves
through art, music, and literature. If one chants this Mantra before beginning
a new creative endeavour, they will have good luck.
Saraswati is considered the mother of The Vedas, the Ancient Hindu
and Yogic scriptures. Many educated people believe that regularly chanting
the Saraswati Mantra can give them profound knowledge and wisdom
concerning the mysteries of Creation that will liberate them from the cycle
of death and rebirth (Samsara). They refer to this emancipation process as
"Moksha."
In the "Om Shri Saraswataya Namaha" Mantra, Shri is a title of
reverence often used before the name of an honoured person or Deity.
Saraswati is the consort of the Hindu God Brahma, who is at the head of the
Trimurti. Since Brahma represents the creation process, he is related to the
Air Element and thoughts, which power and shape the intellect. Saraswati is
Brahma’s Shakti or creative feminine energy. She represents the passive
aspect of the same energy, channelled into the Physical Plane. As such,
Saraswati symbolises the inspiration that drives our creative expressions.

Figure 139: The Goddess Saraswati

BIJA MANTRAS AND MUDRAS OF
THE SEVEN CHAKRAS
Each of the Seven Chakras has a sacred word or sound associated with
it, called a Bija, or "Seed" Mantra. We can use these Mantras in Sound
Healing to tune and balance the Chakric energies and return them to their
optimal vibration. By correcting the energetic frequency of the Chakras,
their dormant potential is released.
When sounding the Bija Mantras of the Seven Chakras, we connect
with their corresponding Five Elements. This connection is created by the
tongue's position in the mouth when vibrating the Bija Mantras. The Five
Elements are attributed to the first five Chakras. At the same time, Ajna
represents the duality of the masculine (Pingala) and feminine (Ida) forces in
nature, the Yin and Yang, and Sahasrara represents the totality and Oneness
of all the Chakras. The Bija Mantras of the Seven Chakras are presented
below.
LAM – Muladhara, the Root Chakra – Earth Element – First Bija
Mantra
VAM – Swadhisthana, the Sacral Chakra – Water Element – Second
Bija Mantra
RAM – Manipura, the Solar Plexus Chakra – Fire Element – Third Bija
Mantra
YAM – Anahata, the Heart Chakra – Air Element – Fourth Bija Mantra
HAM – Vishuddhi, the Throat Chakra – Spirit Element – Fifth Bija
Mantra
SHAM – Ajna, the Mind's Eye Chakra – Duality – Sixth Bija Mantra
OM – Sahasrara, the Crown Chakra – Oneness – Seventh Bija Mantra
However, these seven are not the only Bija Mantras in existence. Each
of the 50 letters of the Sanskrit alphabet has its own Bija Mantra.
Consequently, the 50 Sanskrit letters are related to the first six Chakras,
whose petals total 50, also found in the Thousand Petalled Lotus of
Sahasrara. According to Yogic scriptures, when a Sanskrit letter is sounded

in a Mantra, it opens its corresponding petal of the Chakra it is associated
with. The Petal Mantras of the Chakras are given in Figure 140.

Figure 140: Bija Mantras of the Chakric Petals

Bija Mantras have been used in Yogic practices and meditation for
thousands of years because of their Spiritual effects on our emotional and
mental states of Being. They can be sounded (vibrated silently or chanted
aloud) or meditated on by themselves or attached at the beginning of longer
Mantras to boost their energetic power. These primordial Mantras do not
have a direct translation like other parts of a Mantra do. However, their
intense vibrational qualities make them a potent instrument to access higher
levels of consciousness.
When chanted as part of a longer Mantra, Bija Mantras are generally
expressive of that Mantra's foundational energy or essence. For example,
OM is the source, or seed, from which all the other sounds in a Mantra
precede. Hence, it is the most superior Bija Mantra as the sound of ParaBrahman (the Supreme Brahman); the letters of the Sanskrit alphabet are
only emanations from OM, which is their root sound.
OM represents Sahasrara Chakra, the source energy of the other six
Chakras below it. Sahasrara is the White Light from which the seven colours
of the rainbow emanate in succession, corresponding with the colours of the
Seven Chakras. Note that Sahasrara is traditionally white or violet since
violet is the highest vibrational colour at the apex of the rainbow.
The seven Hand Mudras from Figure 141 are traditionally used to open
the Seven Major Chakras. By combining these Hand Mudras with the Bija
Mantras of the Seven Chakras, we have a powerful technique to optimize the
energy flow of the Chakras and help awaken the Kundalini at the base of the
spine.
Seven Chakras Mudra/Mantra Healing Practice Begin the Chakra
Mudra/Mantra practice by washing your hands. Afterwards, find a
comfortable seated position, either in a meditation Asana or on a chair. Next,
allow yourself to calm your interior by practising the Four-Fold Breath and
silencing the mind. Since this exercise has a visualization component, it
helps to have your eyes closed while performing it.
There are two methods of performing this practice, both of which
should be used and interchanged often. The first method requires you to
begin with Muladhara Mudra and work upwards through the Chakras. This
particular sequence mirrors the rising of the Kundalini as well as climbing
the Tree of Life, where you begin your journey in the lowest Sphere or
Chakra and move upwards in consciousness until you reach the highest.

While performing the Hand Mudra of each Chakra, vibrate/chant its
Bija Mantra in an energizing and projective vocal tone. You may spend
anywhere from one to five minutes on each Mudra before proceeding
further. Be consistent in how long you spend on each Mudra. For example, if
you decide to spend two minutes on Muladhara Mudra, then repeat this
length of time on the following Hand Mudras as well. The key to any
successful Spiritual practice is consistency and balance.
As you are performing a Hand Mudra, and vibrating its corresponding
Bija Mantra, focus on the Chakric area. Connect with the Chakra and
imagine its complementary colour getting brighter and brighter as Light
energy permeates it with every vibration. The visual component of this
exercise is beneficial in focusing the energies being invoked through the
Mantras.

Figure 141: The Seven Chakras Mudras/Mantras
In the second Chakra Mudra/Mantra practice method, you begin with
the highest, Sahasrara, and work your way down in sequence through the
Chakras. In this method, imagine Sahasrara as pure White Light instead of
the colour violet. After finishing Sahasrara’s Mudra/Mantra combo, imagine
a beam of Light coming out of it, and connecting with Ajna Chakra below.
Once you are done with Ajna, project this same beam of Light down to
Vishuddhi, and so on. You are to visualize a beam of Light projecting from
one Chakra to the next until you reach Muladhara. At the end of this
exercise, all the Seven Major Chakras will be lit up, connected by a shaft or
beam of Light.
Whether you have performed the first or second Chakra Mudra/Mantra
practice method, end the exercise by spending a few minutes visualizing
your Chakras lit up from inside your Aura in their respective colours. See
them brighter than ever. If you performed the second practice method, each
of the Chakras would be connected by a Light beam. The Chakra
Mudra/Mantra practice is now complete. You may open your eyes and
regain full waking consciousness.

MEDITATION (DHYANA)
The fast-paced, multitasking lifestyle of Westerners has given rise to
mental health conditions such as anxiety, depression, and chronic stress. For
this reason, holistic mind-body practices such as Yoga and mindfulness
meditation have become popular in the West as stress reduction techniques
that calm the nervous system and boost dopamine and serotonin levels in the
brain. The result is increased happiness and a healthy mind and body.
By dictionary definition, "meditation" means to engage in
contemplation or reflection. It involves being mindful and present here and
now, which heightens awareness by tapping into the realm of pure
consciousness. It is a process that requires us to turn our minds inwards and
unify with a higher reality, one that is substantial and wholesome.
Meditation is a journey towards the union of the Self with the inner
Spirit. It is a quest for a higher truth that only intuition can grasp, requiring
us to overcome our limited intelligence and personal emotions and make a
permanent connection with our true essence.
Going within through meditative practice alleviates subconscious
conditioning that is preventing us from being the best version of ourselves.
Meditation resets the mind, which is helpful in people overcoming bad
habits and harmful addictions. We also reconnect with the Soul by going
inwards, which redirects our moral compass if we have gone astray.
Meditation brings mental clarity and calms our emotions, which has a
healing effect on all aspects of our lives, including personal relationships. It
releases inner tension and anxiety and recharges us with new faith in the
Universe and love for ourselves and others. On a physical level, meditation
lowers the heart rate, improves the immune system, and balances the
Sympathetic and Parasympathetic Nervous Systems, bringing coherence to
the body.
Meditation helps people achieve mental peace and balance, which is
needed to function best in society. This practice has nothing to do with
escaping into an Inner World and abandoning one's responsibilities in the
material realm but finding our core and reaching genuine and lasting
happiness. In doing so, we develop a proper foundation in life that makes
everything we do from that point onwards easier.

Meditation is often the result of people coming to a dead-end in their
search for happiness through satisfying their Ego's desires. As we become
conditioned to associate with the Ego in our teens, this belief stays prevalent
into our early adult years until we conclude that reaching ultimate happiness
requires us to go beyond the Ego to find the Spirit within. This is what it
means to become Spiritual and discern between illusion and reality, and
meditation is the most optimal method of reaching that goal.

Yogic Practice and Meditation
Meditation is the seventh limb or step of Yoga, Dhyana, as outlined in
Patanjali's Yoga Sutras. Attempting to withdraw the senses (Pratyahara) and
concentrate the mind (Dharana) are the fifth and sixth steps of Yoga, which
lead to meditation. The third and fourth steps (Asanas and Pranayama) help
balance out our masculine and feminine energies and calm down the mind,
which leads to going inwards, a prerequisite for meditation.
Once we learn to meditate, we have a technique to contact our inner
Self, the Spirit, enabling us to reach the eighth and final step of Yoga—
Samadhi—Self-identification with the Cosmic Consciousness. Samadhi
implies liberation, or Enlightenment, where the subject and object have
become One.
Since meditation requires mental concentration, control over our Pranic
energy is crucial. We can achieve this through stabilized meditative postures
(Asanas) and breath regulation (Pranayama). People with mental or
emotional disorders such as schizophrenia, psychosis, bipolar, PTSD, etc.,
should focus on Asanas and Pranayama first to balance out their energies, as
it is helpful to overcome the negative tendencies of the mind before
attempting deep meditation.
Opening new doors of the psyche when the mind is not healthy and
strong can be scary for many people. After all, a big part of meditation is
detaching from the mind's activities and separating ourselves from our
thoughts. It is essential to develop courage and faith to face the unknown,
which transmutes fear into positive energy that furthers our Spiritual
Evolution. For this reason, Yogic practices such as Asanas, Pranayama,
Mudras, and Mantras are often used side-by-side with meditation since they
prepare the mind and body for reaching higher states of consciousness.
For example, Mudras help manipulate our inner energies, promoting
physical, mental, and emotional wellness while Mantras invoke/evoke

transcendental energy into the Aura, raising the consciousness above the
level of the body and Ego. Thus, Mantras are paramount in meditation
practice, especially when an individual needs assistance in quieting the mind
and connecting with a higher power.
Because of their effectiveness, I have devoted most of this section to
the Yogic techniques of Asana, Pranayama, Mudra, and Mantra. Their
mastery is meant to prepare the body, mind, and Soul for meditation, which
leads to unity with the Spirit—the Source energy of the Creator.
Regulation of one's lifestyle, including implementing a healthy diet, is
part-and-parcel of preparing the mind for meditation. The first and second
steps of Yoga, Yamas (Self-restraints) and Niyamas (Self-observances),
require us to be aware of our thoughts, emotions, and actions and control
them. As the Ancient Greek aphorism says, "Know Thyself." Only when we
have learned the tendencies of our Egos, our automatic inner nature, can we
begin to try to change and manage it to open ourselves to the Spiritual
energy.
Ultimately, meditation leads to becoming the embodiment of Divine
Love. Divine Love is the essence of the Spirit, which we feel tangibly in our
hearts as an emotion. For this reason, opening the heart centre, or Heart
Chakra is one of the goals of meditation. When Anahata Chakra is readied
through Yogic practices coupled with developing morals and ethics, an
influx of Spiritual energy pours in from Sahasrara Chakra above, resulting in
a permanent transformation of consciousness. When that occurs, the aspirant
has reached the ultimate goal of Yoga—union with the Godhead.

Three Meditation Methods
Just as there are various Spiritual disciplines to reach Enlightenment,
there are many ways to meditate. In this chapter, I will mention three
primary meditation methods that I have found most useful, although there
are many more, some of which I discuss in other sections of this book. Also,
meditation doesn’t have to be stationary since walking can also be a
meditative exercise if you practise mindfulness. Any activity that makes you
present here and now and attunes you to the Spiritual energy constitutes a
form of meditation.
The first type of meditation that I have found very powerful requires
concentrating on a specific object outside of yourself and gazing at it with
your eyes opened. The choices of what thing to meditate on are limitless. It

helps to start with a simple object such as a candle flame (as given in this
chapter) and progress to a more elaborate one, such as a Deity statue.
This type of meditation aims to focus your mind without interruption
and become one with the object, which has very positive Spiritual effects. As
you concentrate and focus on the object, your attention will be taken away
from your subconscious mind and projected outside of yourself, raising your
awareness of your surroundings.
This meditation is meant not only to stimulate your Mind’s Eye but to
awaken it fully and permanently. For this reason, when you focus on a more
intricate object, such as a statue of a Deity, you will find that the longer you
do this practice, your Astral sense will awaken so that you can feel, touch,
smell, even taste the statue with your mind.
The second type of meditation employs the use of sound (Mantras) to
focus the mind. Mantras are particular words, phrases, or affirmations,
whose repetition during meditation raises the consciousness to higher states.
In Yoga, the act of repeating a Mantra with the use of Mala beads is called
Japa, derived from the Sanskrit word "jap," meaning "to utter in a low voice,
repeat internally."
Audibly reciting a prayer during meditation also constitutes a Mantra,
which you should sound with purpose and deep feeling for optimal effects.
Intent and mind-focus are crucial when repeating any Mantra, as is voice
tonality. For example, chanting involves rhythm and pitch, which puts the
mind and body into a trance-like state when performed correctly. Religious
chants and hymns are Mantras that inspire and transport us to an expanded
state of awareness, facilitating a Spiritual awakening. I will discuss Mantras
in more detail in the next chapter of this section.
The third type of meditation method involves visualization.
Visualization meditations are very popular and effective while being easy to
practise. To employ this type of meditation, all you have to do is choose an
object to meditate on and visualize it with closed eyes. Visualization
meditation stimulates the Mind’s Eye since it involves Astral Light, which is
the foundation of all visual images.

Figure 142: Visualization Meditation
A powerful adaptation of this exercise is to visualize a Deity, such as a
God or Goddess, from a pantheon of your choice (Figure 142). Not only will
you receive the expected effects of a visualization meditation, but you may
imbue into your Aura the energetic characteristics of the Deity you
imagined.
For optimal effects, it is best to have the actual object on hand, such as
the statue of the chosen Deity. You may hold the object to feel its energy or

place it at eye level before you as you examine all of its intricate details and
take note of them mentally. Then, you are to close your eyes and imagine
what you just saw, as you focus and concentrate on holding that image in
your Mind’s Eye without interruption.
When starting the visualization meditation practice, you can focus on a
point, line, square, or circle and then reproduce the image in your Mind’s
Eye through imagination. However, focusing your attention on a ThreeDimensional object has specific effects that you cannot achieve with a twodimensional plane, such as fully awakening your Astral senses.
To begin meditating on a Three-Dimensional object, start with
something simple such as a piece of fruit, and then progress to a more
complicated shape, like a Deity statue. Also, be mindful that all colours have
different vibrations, and by visualizing a colour, you invoke its
corresponding energy into your Aura at a subtle level. Therefore, pay
attention to how a visualization meditation makes you feel when colours are
involved.

Meditation Steps
When planning a meditation, make sure that you do it in a quiet and
pleasant place when you know you will be undisturbed. Many people like to
use incense to clear their space of negative energy, thus making it sacred.
Incense also contains specific properties that elevate the mind and prepare it
for meditation. Make sure to burn incense before preparing the space, rather
than during meditation, as it can interfere with breathing and be a distraction.
Sage, Frankincense, and Sandalwood are the most popular incenses
because of their healing properties and calming effects. They also are known
to activate Ajna Chakra, which is a prerequisite in meditation. However, my
personal favourite is the Indian incense Nag Champa, which has a pleasant
aroma and high-vibrational quality.
Mornings are usually the best time for meditation, especially on an
empty stomach. Once you bring food into the body, wait for at least four to
six hours before meditating since the body will be working hard to digest
food which transforms into Pranic energy that powers up the system.
Meditating at night is also advised since we are more relaxed naturally—
meditating before sleep facilitates a calm and balanced mental state,
promoting healthy sleep.

If you make meditation a part of your Yogic practice, you may find that
allotting five to ten minutes to it is enough, which should be performed at
the very end. However, when meditating independently from your Yogic
practice, a fifteen to twenty-minute time frame is optimal and will yield the
best results. Be mindful that the more time you devote to it, the better your
results will be.
Meditations are usually performed while sitting, although you can
meditate while standing, walking, or laying down as well. Although,
beginners should avoid lying down while attempting to meditate since
drifting off into sleep is common with inexperienced people.
Sukhasana, Siddhasana, and Padmasana are the recommended
meditative poses that range depending on your flexibility. When practising
these meditative Asanas, you should place your hands on the knees in either
the Jnana or Chin Mudras.
Sitting in a chair works as well and is no less effective when attempting
to meditate. Beginners may find it the best option since chairs provide the
necessary support for the back and spine to focus more on the meditation
process itself. You can kneel on the floor as well, with or without a cushion
for your knees, whatever you find most comfortable.
Whatever posture you choose, the key is for the back and spine to be
held straight during the meditation while keeping your hands on the sides,
enabling the optimal channelling of Pranic and Chakric energies. Also, when
you are upright, the body is most relaxed and steady, which heightens your
ability to concentrate and go inwards.
After choosing the meditation posture and your concentration point, the
next step to focus on is breathing. The Pranayama Yogic Breathing
technique is optimal, where attention is placed on Diaphragmatic and
Thoracic breathing since expanding the abdomen will maximize oxygen
intake while grounding your inner energies. This type of breathing activates
the entire Chakric system, including the lowest two Chakras, Muladhara and
Swadhisthana. People that naturally breathe only through the chest involve
the higher and middle Chakras while leaving the crucial Earth and Water
Chakras mostly unused, resulting in an unbalanced mental state that gives
rise to stress and anxiety.
Breathing allows you to control the process of meditation; hence be
mindful of your inhale and exhale the entire time. Your breath should be
slow, deep, and rhythmic. Make sure to keep a relaxed and calm composure.

If you lose control over your breath, don’t panic; instead, bring it back into
control and resume your rhythm.
While meditating, you will find that your thoughts wander frequently.
Do not be alarmed; it is a natural part of the process. In fact, the harder you
focus on your chosen object, especially with the eyes closed, your Ego will
do everything in its power to sabotage your attempts. Meditating is not about
quieting the Ego’s thoughts but about learning not to listen to them by
maintaining focus on the task at hand.
Mantra meditations are helpful for beginners since they allow you to
redirect your thoughts instead of emptying your mind by silencing them.
When you find yourself distracted by your thoughts, return to your chosen
point of focus or divert your mind by placing your attention back on your
Mantra. You can also use your breath to gain back control over the mind by
redirecting your attention to it when the mind wanders.
In the beginning, you may feel uncomfortable while meditating. Your
body will twitch, cramp up, your legs will fall asleep, or you will develop
impatience and even agitation. Do not be alarmed when this happens since it
is a sign that your meditation is working. I have found that while learning to
meditate, the first hump to get over is learning how to relax your body since
it is the Ego that uses the body to distract you and deter you from your goal.
You will find that the more times you repeat the meditation process, the
easier it will get.
When your meditation begins to work, the Ego will lose grasp over the
mind, for the time being, resulting in an elevated state of consciousness. The
effect will be a silent and calm mind with pure thoughts in the background
devoid of personal meaning. When you have reached this critical point,
maintain it as long as you can. The more times you can get yourself to this
point during meditation, the easier it will become to tune out of your Ego
and raise the vibration of your consciousness. After some time, you may
develop the natural ability to do this even without meditation, which will
enable you to contact your Higher Self instantaneously to receive its
guidance and wisdom.
Finally, work on purifying your mind in daily life. The more you
develop a strong character and a moral and ethical nature, the meditation
process becomes more accessible. Be persistent and determined to push
through in your meditations, even if it seems you are not getting anywhere.
If you give up too early, you forfeit the incredible benefits of meditation,

which are endless. As the day follows the night, know that you will reach the
goal of your meditations if you keep at it regularly and follow the prescribed
steps.

Candle Flame Meditation (Trataka)
Trataka in Sanskrit means "look" or "gaze," since this practice involves
gazing steadily at a small object such as a black dot, candle flame, a statue of
a Deity, and a geometrical drawing such as a mandala or Yantra. A steady
flame from a candle (Figure 143) is a natural magnet for the eyes and mind
and is considered the most practical and safe. As such, it is most widely used
by Yogis.
Trataka is a Hatha Yoga technique that comes under the category of
Shatkarma (Sanskrit for "six actions"), which are six groups of purification
practices of the body via Yogic means. The aim of Shatkarmas is to create
harmony between the Ida and Pingala Nadis, thereby creating a balance
between your mental, emotional, and physical states. Trataka is the
Shatkarma science of vision.
The eyes are the "windows of the Soul," the medium through which our
minds communicate with the external environment. They allow in Light,
illuminating the inner Self. Trataka is a technique that lets us look within our
minds and Souls through the eyes. Since our minds are constantly engaging
with what our eyes look at, Trataka’s single-pointed awareness allows us to
calm the subconscious mind, powered by the Ego. As the Ego goes into
neutral, its continual thought patterns slow down, which allows the
consciousness to rise and enter higher states of mind.
Stilling the mind and its thought patterns is a prerequisite for meditation
(Dhyana). By focusing your gaze on a candle flame, you are activating Ajna
Chakra, which not only has a calming effect on the mind but is the doorway
to higher states of consciousness. As such, with regular Trataka practice,
one’s psychic abilities heighten, as does intuition, enabling higher levels of
understanding of the mysteries of Creation.

Figure 143: Candle Flame Meditation (Trataka)

With Trataka, the mind becomes purified and invigorated, enhancing
one’s concentration (Dharana) and eradicating all issues associated with the
eyes and vision. In addition, heart and respiration rate and the activity of
other organs slow down, promoting rejuvenation via one’s Pranic energy.
Trataka balances the Sympathetic and Parasympathetic Nervous
Systems, relieving nervous tension. Also, dormant areas of the brain get
stimulated with regular Trataka practice, while activity-dominant areas get a
chance to recharge themselves, promoting a healthy brain. Finally, regular
Trataka practice improves sleep quality by calming the mind while treating
depression and other mental and emotional issues.
Trataka should be practised at the end of your Yoga sequence, after
Asanas, Pranayamas, Mudras, and Bandhas. When practised on its own, it is
best performed in the morning, when the mind is quiet, and eyes are more
active. It can also be performed at night, before sleep. Avoid Trataka on a
full stomach, as is the case with all Yogic practices.
To begin the Trataka meditation, sit in a dark room where you will be
undisturbed for the exercise duration. Then, light a candle and place it on a
small table approximately two to three feet in front of you at eye level
(Figure 144). Make sure there is no draft in the vicinity that can affect the
movement of the candle flame.

Figure 144: Candle Flame Placement

Sit in any comfortable meditation Asana with your hands on your knees
in either Jnana or Chin Mudras. Your spine and head should be held straight.
Close your eyes now while relaxing your body, especially the eyes. Ensure
that the body is kept steady throughout the exercise.
Open your eyes now and start gazing at the candle flame. Your ideal
gazing spot is the red tip of the wick. Maintain the gaze for as long as you
can while avoiding blinking or moving the eyeballs in any way. Do not strain
the eyes as the tension may cause them to flicker. Stop if the eyes start to
water.
By becoming one with the flame, you should lose awareness of all
bodily sensations. Your Being will become externalized, drawing you away
from all distractive mind-chatter. If the mind begins to wander and your
concentration lowers, bring the focus back on the candle flame.
After one to two minutes, close your eyes and gaze at the after-image of
the flame in the space before you. If the after-image begins to move side to
side or up and down, you can stabilize it by focusing on it harder. When the
image starts to fade, bring it back through memory. When it is completely
gone, open your eyes and begin gazing at the candle flame again.
Repeat this process three to four times if you are a beginner, taking no
more than two minutes in total. When you are ready to end the exercise, rub
your hands together for five seconds to generate Pranic energy and then
place them on your eyes for ten seconds to absorb it. Always end the Trataka
meditation in this way, which provides healing energy to your eyes.
As you get more experienced with the Trataka meditation, increase its
duration up to ten minutes. People who have insomnia, depression, or other
mental and emotional issues should devote up to twenty minutes to this
exercise.
Note that people suffering from glaucoma, epilepsy, or severe eye
ailments should not practice Trataka. Instead, they can substitute their point
of focus with a black dot, performed in a well-lit room. Although meditating
on a black dot will yield similar benefits as Trataka, it is less potent since it
omits the focus on the after-image, which effectively opens the Mind’s Eye
with regular use.

YOGA AND THE FIVE ELEMENTS
Yoga helps us purify and balance the Five Elements of Earth, Water,
Air, Fire, and Spirit (Space). Doing so restores these Elements to their
optimal health within the body and unfolds our inner powers and abilities
that correspond with each Element. However, since each of the Five
Elements is responsible for different structures in the body, disease and
psychological suffering may occur if any Element becomes impure or falls
out of balance with another Element.
Since the Earth Element ("Bhumi" in Sanskrit) relates to all solids, it
corresponds with the physical body, namely the skeletal and muscular
systems. The Earth Element includes all tissues in the body, including the
skin, teeth, nails, and hair. The physical body is the vehicle of our
consciousness and our foundation that grounds us to Planet Earth.
The Water Element ("Jala" in Sanskrit) relates to all fluids; 60% of our
physical body consists of water, which moves through us via our circulatory
system. We can also find water in our brain, heart, lungs, muscles, kidneys,
and even bones. In addition, our blood, sweat, saliva, urine, semen, and
vaginal and uterine fluids also contain water. Our physical and mental
health depends on our body's water flow since the Water Element regulates
consciousness.
The Fire Element relates to digestion and metabolism and is concerned
with hunger, thirst, and our need for sleep. Fire is called "Agni" in Sanskrit,
the God of Fire in Hinduism. In the practice of Asanas, Agni refers to the
internal warmth and heat that is generated in specific postures. The Fire
Element relates to our Souls, our source of Light that has the power to
create and destroy.
The Air Element ("Pavan" in Sanskrit) relates to our respiratory system
and is concerned with expanding and contracting Pranic energy in the body.
Prana is Light energy, the Life Force that all living organisms require for
survival. The air around us carries Pranic energy; the mere act of breathing
brings Prana into the body. Pranic energy is also needed to power the mind.
For this reason, breath control (Pranayama) is essential in all Yogic
practices since one of the aims of Yoga is to focus the mind and become
Self-aware.

Spirit/Space Element ("Akasha" in Sanskrit) powers our inner
cognitive functions. It is our source of love, truth, wisdom, inspiration, and
faith. However, Spirit energy can become corrupted through the absence of
reason and illogical thinking, which creates fear. Our greatest fear relates to
survival on the Physical Plane, as our primal fear of death. We fear death
because we cannot know with certainty what happens when we die since we
have no memories beyond this life. As it is Eternal and Timeless, Spirit
gives us faith in the afterlife—the continuation of our existence beyond
death. The best way to experience Spirit energy is by silencing the mind and
going deep within. Meditation is the most optimal way to tune into the
Spirit within us to induce peace of mind and bliss while bringing inspiration
into our daily life.

Activating and Balancing the Elements
There is a natural order of the Elements in the body. While engaged in
Asana, Pranayama, Mudra, Mantra, and meditation, practising conscious
awareness of the Elements in the body allows us to channel Pranic energy
into their corresponding Chakric centres. By activating our Elemental
powers, we can achieve balance in mind, body, and Soul.
The Earth and Water Elements are below the navel. Whenever we
focus our attention on our pelvic region, whether through movement,
meditation, or breathing techniques, we stimulate these two Elements into
action.
Stationary Asanas facilitate stability by deepening our connection with
the Earth. As our physical body gets grounded, we establish our physical
foundation, thereby connecting with the Earth Element. Our muscles
become supple while the joints become steady. The body itself becomes
strong and firm. Asanas connect us to our feet and become aware of our
body language and movements. The mind becomes grounded and focused.
Since stationary Asanas slow the metabolic fire, they cool down the body
and stabilize the mind.
Transitioning from one Asana to the next takes on a flowing action as
we attempt to move fluidly through our movements. Our ability to hold an
Asana and then let it go allows our minds to become adaptable from one
moment to the next. The grace and resilience accompanying Asana practice
enable us to connect with the Water Element. Our consciousness becomes

more open and aware of our surroundings, taking us out of our minds and
attuning us to the present moment.
The Fire Element is placed in the middle of the torso, in the Solar
Plexus area. Generally, the Fire Element gets activated through dynamic
Asanas that involve movement and flow. However, there is a breaking point
in stationary Asanas when the body begins generating heat, making the
body tremble, inducing sweat. This breaking point is when the Ego and
mind want to quit holding the Asana. Invoking the necessary energy and
willpower to continue will facilitate an even more significant increase in the
body's Fire Element energy, resulting in burning out the toxins from the
other Elements. According to Yogis, some Asanas increase the digestive
fire to such a degree that they can remove diseases in the body entirely.
The Air Element is in the middle of the chest and is our primary centre
of Pranic energy. Our muscles, joints, and other supportive tissues expand
when we breathe. As a result, our mind opens up through different
Pranayama techniques while the body becomes light as a feather.
The mere act of breathing stimulates the Air Element into action,
although with controlled breathing, we can focus Pranic energy into any
area of our body to facilitate healing. Breath control allows the individual to
focus their Pranic energy during the practice of Asanas. Prana is powerful
in cleansing the body of toxins since it activates the purifying Fire Element.
The Water Element gets stimulated if we focus the Pranic energy into our
abdomen area, such as through Diaphragmatic Breathing.
The Element of Spirit, or Space, is in the head and is most accessible
through meditation techniques, especially ones that utilize the Mind's Eye.
When we perform Asanas and Pranayama techniques with grace, focus, and
conscious awareness of our movements, thoughts, and emotions, we infuse
love, care, and dedication into our practice which activates the Spirit
Element.
Utilizing a balanced sequence of Asanas that include movement and
stillness has tremendous benefits in balancing the Elements. It allows us to
regulate the Fire Element and harmonize the Earth and Air Elements, which
are natural enemies—as the body deals with grounding, the mind deals with
thoughts. While one is solid (Earth), the other is Etheric (Air). Balancing
the body and mind allows one to connect with the Soul, which seeks unity
with the Spirit.

Asanas make the body and mind firm and grounded while making the
limbs flexible. Flexible limbs allow a more significant movement of Pranic
energy through the Nadis that run through them. When the Air Element is
optimized in the body, we can add the necessary fuel to the Water and Fire
Elements. A flexible body has great benefits for one's Chakric system,
which is one reason why Asanas are so attractive to the general population.

***
An efficient and simple way to balance the Five Elements is with Hand
Mudras (Figure 145). In addition to increasing or decreasing the Elements,
each Hand Mudra has added mind-body benefits, as mentioned in their
descriptions. To perform the Hand Mudras for the Five Elements, follow the
instructions outlined on page 344.

Figure 145: Hand Mudras for the Five Elements

AYURVEDA
The holistic medicine of Ayurveda dates back to the Vedic era at around
the same time as Yoga was developed. Although seemingly unrelated, Yoga
and Ayurveda share the same culture, philosophy, language, and methodology
and are considered sister sciences by Hindus. While Yogic practices deal with
harmonizing our mind, body, and Soul, Ayurveda provides an understanding of
our physical and mental constitutions and how diet and lifestyle affect our
bodies and minds.
Ayurveda's basis is the theory of the "Tridosha" (Sanskrit for the "Three
Doshas), the three forces or "humours" in the body—Vata (wind), Pitta (bile),
and Kapha (phlegm). Vata governs movement in the body, Pitta governs
digestion and nutrition, and Kapha is the energy that forms the body's structure,
mass, and fluids. While the Three Doshas primarily influence our physical
body, they also have subtle counterparts that affect the mind and the Five
Koshas: Prana, Tejas, and Ojas. The activities of our bodies and minds are
dependent on the proper functioning of the Three Doshas. When they are out of
balance, they contribute to disease processes.
The Tridosha are also responsible for the individual preferences in foods,
including flavours and temperatures. They govern the creation, maintenance,
and destruction of body tissue and the elimination of waste products from the
body. They are also responsible for psychological processes, from negative
fear-based emotions to loving ones.
Ayurveda also includes the science of the 108 Marmas or energy points in
the body. Marma points are vital points in the body that are infused by Pranic
energy and influenced by consciousness. There are many benefits to working
with Marma points, including but not limited to: clearing psychological and
emotional blocks, improving circulation and energy flow, alleviating muscle
pain and joint stiffness, and relieving tension and anxiety.
The essences of the Three Doshas arise from the Five Great Elements,
called the "Panchamahabhuta" in Ayurveda (Sanskrit). Each of the Three
Doshas is a combination of two of the Five Elements: Vata is Air (Vayu) and
Spirit (Akasha), Pitta is Fire (Agni) and Water (Jala), and Kapha is Earth
(Prithivi) and Water (Jala), as shown in Figure 146. The Three Doshas depend
on one another for balance and health of mind and body. For example, the air
principle kindles bodily fire while water controls it, preventing bodily tissues

from burning up. Air also moves the water; without Vata Dosha, Pitta and
Kapha are immobile.
People can also be Bi-Doshic or even Tri-Doshic, meaning they share
qualities with two or three Doshic types. Thus, there are a total of seven types
of constitutions in Ayurveda: Vata, Pitta, Kapha, Vata-Pitta, Pitta-Kapha, VataKapha, and Vata-Pitta-Kapha. Understanding the Doshas allows us to balance
our inner energies and align our Koshas, improving our psychological, mental,
and emotional health.
However, even as we are fated to live under the specific governance of
particular Elements in this lifetime, we may still fluctuate in the Doshas when
significant changes occur in our psyche, environment, diet, climate, etc. Thus,
under certain circumstances and conditions, one Dosha will predominate, while
in other situations, another will.
The most important principle to keep in mind when working with the
Doshas is that like increases like, while opposites balance one another.
Therefore, food, weather, and situations that have similar characteristics as the
Doshas will increase their energies, while those with opposite characteristics
will decrease them. The same concept applies to Yogic practices like Asanas,
Pranayamas, and Hand Mudras, which can either balance a Dosha or aggravate
it, depending on the nature and mechanics of the exercise performed.

Figure 146: The Five Elements and the Three Doshas

The Three Doshas

Vata Dosha
As the energy of movement in the mind and body, Vata Dosha is
associated with the Air Element. Vata is dry, cold, light, mobile, active, hard,
fine, rough, erratic, changeable, and clear. On a subtle level, Vata relates to
Pranic energy responsible for all psycho-physical functions in the body. Prana
is carried in the body by the Five Prana Vayus, each playing a specific role in
harmonizing the mind and body. Vata is considered the most powerful of the
Three Doshas since it carries both Pitta and Kapha.
Vata regulates all movement processes in the body at a microcellular and
macroscopic level. Breathing, blinking of the eyelids, movements in the
muscles and tissues, and heart pulsations are all governed by Vata Dosha. In
addition, Vata governs catabolism, the process of breaking down large
molecules into smaller ones to be used as energy. Air Element-related inner
processes, like imagination and creativity, are influenced by Vata, including
emotions such as inspiration and anxiety.
Vata types are governed by the second sheath of the material self, the vital
body—Pranamaya Kosha. Vata’s area of operation is the lower part of the trunk
that includes the large intestine and the pelvic cavity (Figure 147). It also works
through the bones, skin, ears and thighs. If the body develops an excess of Vata
energy, it accumulates in these areas.
Autumn is known as the Vata season for its cool and crisp weather. People
with Vata Dosha are usually physically undeveloped. They are thin and lean
with prominent joints and visible veins and muscle tendons. Vata types tend to
have an innate innocence and seek a Spiritual life. They enjoy meeting new
people, doing creative activities, and experiencing new environments.
Vatas are highly mentally active, quick-witted, humorous, clever, and
innovative. They are strongly influenced by Planetary and Moon cycles, the
weather, the people they surround themselves with, and the foods they eat.
Since they tend to have colder than average body temperature, Vatas enjoy hot,
humid weather.
Vatas are proficient at multitasking, although they have issues with
commitments and completing projects. They are generally ungrounded, which
makes them forgetful, moody, stressed, and have trouble sleeping. They often
eat heavy foods to ground and tranquillize their active minds and ingest
stimulants like coffee and sugar not to burn out since they have low physical
stamina. Vatas are prone to digestive issues and poor blood circulation while
having naturally lower than average immunity.
According to Ayurveda, a Vata-dominant person should implement
meditation, Yogic practices, and other calming and balancing activities in their

daily schedule. They need to keep their bodies warm by avoiding cold weather
and exercising, including performing cardiovascular activities. Vatas should
spend time in nature regularly to ground themselves and go to sleep before 10
PM to ensure a good night’s sleep. Like all Doshic types, a Vata-dominant
person needs to implement a healthy diet and avoid foods that aggravate their
condition. (Consult Table 5.) Finally, Vata types would benefit from drinking
warm beverages often while avoiding stimulants, such as coffee, alcohol,
chocolate, and other sugars.

Figure 147: The Three Doshas and Body Zones

Pitta Dosha
Pitta is the energy of transformation and is therefore aligned with the Fire
Element. Pitta is hot, oily, light, mobile, fluid, sharp, and sour-smelling. It
governs digestion, absorption, and nutrition assimilation while regulating body
heat, skin colouration, and visual perception. Pitta’s subtle form is Tejas or
Agni, the Fire of the mind that is responsible for willpower, confidence,
intelligence, understanding, reasoning, focus, and self-discipline.
Pitta relates to the principle of metabolism that deals with converting food
into useable energy that runs cellular functions. Metabolism is broken down
into two processes—catabolism and anabolism, which are governed by Vata
and Kapha Doshas.
Pitta types are ruled by the mind-body, the third sheath of the material Self
—Manomaya Kosha. Pitta’s area of operation is the central area of the trunk
that contains the stomach, liver, spleen, gall bladder, duodenum, and pancreas
(Figure 147). Most Ayurvedic schools also attribute the small intestine to Pitta
instead of Vata since it operates in conjunction with the digestive fire. In
addition, Pitta works through the sweat glands, blood, fat, eyes, and skin. If
there is pain anywhere near the Solar Plexus in any organs described above,
Pitta energy may be imbalanced.
Summer is known as the season of Pitta because of its hot weather and
sunny days. Pitta types are usually of average height and weight, with a toned
body and moderate frame. They have good blood circulation and healthy skin
and hair. Since Pittas are dominated by the Fire Element, they are inherently
self-determined, motivated, competitive, goal-oriented, tenacious, intense, and
irritable. Pittas are athletic and have an easy time putting on muscle. As
natural-born leaders prone to aggression and conflict, they are often challenged
by negative emotions such as doubt, anger, hate, and jealousy.
Pittas are generally always hungry with quick metabolisms and are
predisposed to mood swings if they don’t eat. They often ingest large quantities
of food and liquid and enjoy cold drinks. Pittas are sensitive to hot
temperatures and are susceptible to skin inflammations, acne, dermatitis, and
eczema. Their body temperature is higher than average, and their hands and
feet are usually hot. Pittas tend to work too much since they are smart and have
a strong desire for success.
Ayurvedic medicine suggests that Pitta-dominant people need to cultivate
moderation in all things and not take life too seriously. They need to make time
for fun activities to balance their work-life, which often dominates. Pittas
should avoid extreme heat while implementing a healthy diet. (Table 5). Daily

meditation, Yogic practices, and other calming and balancing Spiritual
activities are recommended for Pittas to tranquillize their irritable temperament.

Kapha Dosha
As the Archetypal Mother Earth energy, Kapha Dosha provides the
material for physical existence, bringing solidity to the subtle Elements in the
body. Kapha is cold, wet, oily, heavy, slow, dull, static, soft, dense, and cloudy.
It relates to bodily water that gives our body resistance to the outside Elements
to maintain longevity on a cellular level. Kapha provides skin moisture, joint
lubrication, brain and nervous system protection, immunity to diseases, and
wound healing.
Kapha's subtle form is called Ojas, which is Sanskrit for "vigour." Ojas
links consciousness and Matter; it is the vital fluid-like energy of the Water
Element that supports the mind's functions. Ojas is responsible for memory
retention. It supplies us with mental strength, endurance, and powers of
concentration.
Kapha types are ruled by the food body, the first layer of the material Self
—Annamaya Kosha. Its area of operation is primarily the lungs, although
Kapha is also present in the nostrils, throat, sinuses, and bronchi (Figure 147).
Water Element-related emotions such as love, calmness, and forgiveness are
associated with Kapha Dosha and negative feelings like greed and envy. Kapha
has a direct influence on Ego attachments.
The season of Kapha is spring, when things are most fertile, and plant life
begins to grow again. Kaphas usually have well-developed bodies with thick
bones and strong body frames. They have low but regular appetites and slowacting metabolisms and digestive systems. They tend to gain weight, so they
need to exercise regularly. The influence of the passive Elements of Water and
Earth makes them emotionally and mentally stable, loyal, and compassionate.
They rarely get upset and think before they act. As such, they journey through
life in a slow, deliberate manner.
Kapha types have a systematic approach to life; they generally like to plan
things out instead of being whimsical like Vatas. They have powerful empathic
abilities and strong sexual energy. Kaphas are patient, trusting, calm, wise,
romantic, and have healthy immune systems. However, they are prone to
breathing issues like allergies and asthma and have a higher risk of heart
disease and mucous build-up than other Doshic types. In addition, since the
Water Element predominates, Kaphas retain information well and are
thoughtful in word and deed. They emotionally relate to the world, making
them susceptible to depression and lack of motivation.
In Ayurveda, a Kapha-dominant person is advised to focus on regular,
daily exercise, a healthy diet (Table 5), and maintaining a warm body

temperature. In addition, they should fill their time with activities that inspire
and motivate them while establishing a regular sleep routine since Kapha types
are known to oversleep.
TABLE 4: Ayurvedic Constitution Chart (Three Doshas)
Aspect of
Constitution

Vata Type (Air
and Spirit)

Height &
Weight

Eyes

Lips
Hair

Low Weight

Rough, Dull, Dark,

Soft, Fair, Rosy, Oily,

Sunken, Small, Dry,

Sharp, Piercing,

Brown, Raises Eyebrows Green, Gray, Light Brown
Small, Thin Lips,
Cracking
Dry, Thin, Dark,
Frizzy
Irregular, Protruding,

Dry, Rough, Brittle

Body

Less than Normal;
Palms and Feet Cold
Visible, Stiff,
Unsteady, Crack Easily

Sweat
Stool

Kapha Type (Water
and Earth)
Short but Sometimes
Tall, Heavy, Gains Weight
Easily
Large, Stocky, WellBuilt
Smooth, Pale, Light,

Easily Cracks, Dry, Cool Warm, Freckles and Moles Moist, Oily, Cool, Thick

Nails

Joints

Medium Height
Medium, Toned

Gaps

Temperature

Constant Weight,

Thin, Lean, Slim

Very Small or Big,
Teeth

Water)

Tall or Very Short,

Frame
Skin

Pitta Type (Fire and

Normal
Hard, Dry, Twice a
Day

Big, Attractive, Blue,
Thick Eyelashes, Gentle
Look

Thick, Medium, Soft,

Large, Smooth, Rosy

Red
Fine, Straight, Oily,
Smooth, Blonde or Red

Thick, Curly, Wavy,
Dark or Light

Medium Sized, Soft,
Bleeding Gums

Full, Strong, White,
Well-Formed

Thin, Smooth,
Reddish

Big, Soft, White,
Glossy

More than Normal;

Normal; Palms and

Palms, Feet, and Face Hot Feet Slightly Cold
Loose, Moderately
Hidden

Firm, Strong, Large,
Well-Hidden

Very Easily, Strong
Smell

Slow to Start but
Profuse

Soft, Loose, 1-2
Times/Day

Well-Formed, Once a
Day

Urination
Immune
System
Endurance
Appetite &
Thirst
Taste
Preference
Physical
Activity
Temperament/
Emotions
Sensitivities

Sparse
Low, Variable
Poor, Easily
Exhausted
Variable, Fast
Intake of Food and
Drink
Sweet, Sour, Salty
Very Active, Gets
Tired Easily
Fearful,
Uncertain
Cold, Dryness,
Wind

Personality
Social
Memory
Schedule

Dreams
Sleep

to Heat
Moderate but
Focused
High, Excessive,
Must Eat Every 3-4 Hours
Sweet, Bitter,
Astringent
Moderate, Gets Tired
Easily
Courageous,
Irritable

Moderate, Clear
Good, High
Steady, High
Moderate, Constant,
Can Tolerate Hunger and
Thirst
Pungent, Bitter,
Astringent
Lethargic, Moves
Slowly, Does Not Tire
Easily
Calm, Loving, Greedy,
Attached, Self-Conscious

Heat, Sunlight, Fire

Cold, Dampness

Focused, Direct,

Slow, Steady, Soft,

Unfocused, Misses Point Good at Arguments, Goal- Firm Speech, Not Big
Easily

Mind State

Moderate, Sensitive

Changeable, Adaptable, Motivated, Confident,

Fast, Frequent,
Speech

Profuse, Yellow

Hyperactive,
Restless
Creative,
Imaginative
Make and Changes
Often
Low, Forgets
Things Easily

Oriented
Aggressive,
Intelligent
Intelligent, Willful,
Efficient
Friends are Work
Related
Moderate, Average
Memory

Talker
Peaceful, Slow, Steady
Caring, Patient,
Thoughtful
Long-Lasting
Friendships
High, Remembers Well
Good at Keeping

Irregular Schedule

Long Workday

Skies, Winds,

Fire, Lightning,

Water, River, Ocean,

Flying, Jumping,

Violence, War, Colourful

Lake Swimming, Colourful

Running

Views

Views

Sparse, Interrupted,

Variable, Sound, 6-

Routine

Excess, Heavy,

Disturbed, Less than

8hrs

Prolonged, 8hrs or More

6hrs
Extravagant
Finances

Spender, Spends Money
Frivolously

Total

=

Average Spender,
Focus on Luxuries

Frugal, Saves Money,
Only Spends When Needed

=

=

How to Determine Your Doshic Ratio
Each human being has a unique ratio of the Three Doshas, depending on
which one of the three Elements of Air, Water, and Fire is dominant in us. In
Sanskrit, the personal blueprint of energies that rule us in life is called
"Prakriti," meaning "the original or natural form of condition of something—its
primary substance." The current state of the Three Doshas, after the moment of
conception, is the "Vikruti," meaning "after Creation." It refers to our
constitution after being exposed to and altered by the environment. The Vikruti
defines our Doshic imbalance.
There are three ways to determine your Doshic ratio, two of which you
can do on your own using this book and access to the internet. The other
method is to see an Ayurvedic practitioner who will use pulse and tongue
reading as diagnostic tools. If you want the most accurate diagnosis, I
recommend all three.
The first method is to use the chart in Table 4 and diagnose yourself.
Starting at the top of the chart with "Height & Weight," choose which one of
the Three Doshas descriptions best describes you. Once you have selected it,
put a checkmark at the bottom of one of the Vata, Pitta, or Kapha columns in
the final row where it says "Total." Then, continue with the second aspect,
"Frame." and do the same. And so on, until you have finished going over the
entire chart. Finally, add up the totals for each of the Three Doshas and put a
number after the equals sign in the last row.
The Dosha with the highest number will generally indicate your primary
constitution, while the Dosha with the second-highest number will indicate
your second dominant Dosha. If you have two Doshas that are relatively equal,
you are Bi-Doshic or even Tri-Doshic if you have a similar ratio between all
Three Doshas. If one of the Doshas has a significantly higher number than the
other two, as is often the case, then that is your dominant Dosha.
The second "do it yourself" method uses Vedic Astrology to determine
your Doshic ratio, which you can compare with your results from the chart in

Table 4. Since the science of Ayurveda aligns with Vedic Astrology, you need
to obtain a Vedic Astrology Birth Chart, which you can find online. Keep in
mind that you will get an entirely different readout from a Vedic Astrology
Birth Chart than one through Western Astrology. However, don't let that
confuse nor alarm you because you will be focusing primarily on the
Ascendant and the Houses.
Vedic Astrology is more accurate at evaluating the Macrocosmic energy
influences associated with your time of birth since it is aligned with the actual
positions of the Star Constellations. So, to get this right, you need your exact
time of birth. In Western Astrology, your time of birth is second in importance
to your day of birth since Western Astrology prioritizes the Sun Sign. Using
Vedic Astrology to determine your Doshic ratio is an age-old, proven method
used by Hindus and other Ayurveda practitioners since its inception.
Before explaining how to gauge your Vedic Astrology Birth Chart, you
need to know the Doshic nature of the Planets and Zodiac Signs. Vata Dosha is
represented by Gemini, Capricorn, Aquarius, and Virgo because these four
signs are ruled by Mercury (Gemini and Virgo) and Saturn (Capricorn and
Aquarius). Mercury and Saturn are Vata Planets since they correspond with the
Air Element.
Pitta is represented by Aries, Leo, and Scorpio as these three Signs are
ruled by Mars (Aries and Scorpio) and the Sun (Leo). Mars and the Sun are
Pitta Planets since they correspond with the Fire Element. And lastly, Kapha is
represented by Taurus, Cancer, Libra, Sagittarius, and Pisces since these five
signs are ruled by Venus (Taurus and Libra), Jupiter (Sagittarius and Pisces)
and the Moon (Cancer). These three are Kapha Planets since they correspond
with the Water Element.
As for the last two Navagrahas, Rahu's energy influence is akin to Saturn,
only more subtle. Therefore, it relates to the Vata Dosha. On the other hand,
Ketu's energy influence resembles Mars, although subtler, making it correspond
with Pitta Dosha.
I will be using my Vedic Astrology Birth Chart (Figure 148) as an
example to show you how you can determine your Dosha. I am using a South
Indian Birth Chart whose presentation is slightly different than a North Indian
one, although the results are the same. Keep in mind that I am showing you a
basic method of doing this using a Vedic Astrology Birth Chart (Rishi Chart),
which provides general information regarding the location of Planets. However,
I am omitting the Navamsa Chart, which shows the active quality and strength
of the Planets.

A full Vedic Astrology Birth Chart generally includes both Charts and the
Nakshatra (Lunar Houses). It is a rather complex yet thorough science that
requires serious study to be able to interpret an entire Birth Chart. For this
reason, I also recommend seeing a trained and skilled Vedic Astrologer to help
you read your full Birth Chart so you can get the most optimal results.
Once you have obtained your Birth Chart, first take a look at your
Ascendant and determine its Lord or ruling Planet. According to Vedic
Astrology, your Ascendant is the most significant influence on you since it is
your body. In Sanskrit, the Ascendant is called "Tanur Bhava," meaning "the
house of the body." Whatever Zodiac Sign your Ascendant falls into usually
represents your dominant Dosha.
Next, look at your Ascendant ruling Planet and what Zodiac Sign it falls
into. For example, my Ascendent is Gemini, a Vata Sign whose Lord is
Mercury. However, my Mercury is in Sagittarius, a Kapha Sign ruled by
Jupiter. So far, my Chart analysis points to a Vata constitution with an influence
of Kapha.
Next, look at your First House, see which Planet or Planets are placed
there, and determine their Dosha(s). For example, I have Rahu in the First
House, a Vata Planet. So now we have another strong indicator that I am a Vata
personality, with some influence from Kapha. However, our analysis doesn't
end there.
Take a look now at your Moon Sign, which represents your psychological
nature, including your thoughts and emotions. Keep in mind that the Moon has
a more significant impact on females than males because of the connection
between one's feminine nature and the Moon. As you can see, my Moon is in
Virgo, which is a Vata Sign whose ruling Planet is Mercury.

Figure 148: The Author's Vedic Astrology Birth Chart
Next, take a look at your Sun Sign, which is indicative of your essential
vitality and character expression. Males tend to express their Sun Sign more
than females because of the connection of one's masculine nature and the Sun.
My Sun Sign is in Capricorn, ruled by Saturn, another Vata Planet.
Now you need to look at your Birth Chart as a whole to determine which
Planets are dominant overall. While the Ascendant, Moon, and Sun Signs carry
the most weight in determining your Doshic ratio, Rahu and Ketu are
considered least important. The other Planets are all equal in importance. If a
particular Planet is prominent, it will affect all aspects of one's life, including
their constitution. Also, you need to pay specific attention to Planets placed in
their own Sign.
In my Birth Chart, from the nine Planetary attributions plus the
Ascendent, I have an equal balance of Mercury and Saturn (three each), with
two Jupiter, one Venus, and one Mars. Therefore, as predicted, my Birth Chart
has an abundance of Vata Planets (six), with three Kapha and one Pitta. Also,
and most importantly, my Ascendant, Moon, and Sun Signs are all Vata. This
indicates that I am a Vata personality with an influence of Kapha and a touch of
Pitta.
Finally, take a look at the Planet or Planets in your Sixth House (health
and wellness) and Eighth House (death and longevity) to get some insight into
Doshic imbalances and disease potential. The Sixth House rules all aspects of
one's healthy lifestyle, such as diet, nutrition, exercise, and the pursuit of selfempowerment. For example, in my Birth Chart, I have Jupiter (Kapha) in my
Sixth House, which indicates a predisposition to over-indulgence, liver issues,
and blood circulation problems. And my Sun (Pitta) in the Eighth House
suggests weight gain and blood pressure issues. This points to my Doshic
imbalance coming from Kapha and Pitta influences.
So now, how does this information compare with my Western Astrology
Birth Chart? Well, since my Sun Sign is an Aquarius, my Moon Sign is Libra,
and my Ascendant is Cancer, and Western Astrology prioritizes the Sun Sign, I
am of the Air Element constitution, with an influence of Water. Keep in mind
that I am using the traditional Zodiacal correspondences with the Four
Elements. So, my results match my outcome with Vedic Astrology. However,
this is not to say it will coincide for everyone. And remember, the main reason
I am prioritizing Vedic Astrology in this case, even though I’ve studied
Western Astrology my whole life, is because it is the sister science of

Ayurveda. Thus, we are following the traditional way of determining your
Dosha.
As far as the Ayurvedic Constitution Chart in Table 4, one-half of my
checkmarks went to Vata Dosha while the other half went to Pitta. Even though
my Birth Chart does not reflect a Pitta constitution, since I have constant
Kundalini activity in my Body of Light, my physical body feels like it is on fire
a lot of the time, which affects me at a cellular level. So now you see why it is
crucial to analyze your Birth Chart and the Ayurvedic Constitution Chart—you
might not get the same results.
Remember what I said earlier: the Doshas are not fixed. Even if you may
be predisposed to one Dosha or several, you may still fluctuate depending on
the changes in your psychology, environment, climate, etc. Ayurvedic science
is not permanent and unchanging, but it keeps evolving along with you.
Therefore, I advise you to connect with your Higher Self and let it be your
teacher and guide to be aware of inner changes and adjust accordingly.

Ayurvedic Diet
The three primary sources of Pranic energy are the Sun (Fire Element), the
wind (Air Element), and the Earth below our feet (Water and Earth Elements).
The Sun is our main source of Prana, which energises us through its Light rays.
The air around us also contains Prana, which we absorb through the lungs and
the Chakras. We take in Pranic energy from the Earth as well via our Foot
Soles. The Earth also nourishes us through the foods it produces, which contain
Pranic energy at varying degrees of vibration. As such, what we eat directly
affects us at all levels of consciousness.
The quality of our minds, bodies, and Souls is highly dependent on the
essence of the food we bring into the body. Once the food is converted into
useable Pranic energy by the digestive system, the Body of Light's thousands of
Nadis carry it into every body cell. Herein is the essence of the popular saying,
"You are what you eat." As such, finding the proper diet can make the
difference between a healthy mind, body, and Soul, or one that is diseased.
Although dis-ease can manifest physically, it can be of a mental, emotional,
and Spiritual nature as well.
In Ayurveda, our physical and psychological processes are dependent on
the proper functioning of the Three Doshas. If they become out of balance,
disease processes can manifest on physical and subtle levels. As such,
Ayurveda is primarily concerned with the energies of different foods to balance
the Doshas. It is not worried about nutritional requirements but that the food is

in harmony with our nature. For example, food can either enhance mental
processes and peace of mind or disturb them.
Liquid intake is also crucial in Ayurveda since what we drink nourishes
our Life Force. For example, stale water, or contaminated water, can disturb
our Prana and unsettle our emotions and thoughts. The same goes for alcohol,
coffee, and other stimulants. Essentially, everything we take into the body
affects us at all levels of consciousness.
The first step to adjusting your diet to optimise your energy system and
physical body is to find your Doshic ratio using your Vedic Astrology Birth
Chart and Table 4. Other than eating foods that align with the nature of your
Doshic ratio or your dominant Dosha(s), there are other factors of food intake
to consider. These include the correct preparation of foods and the right
combination, the proper amount and frequency of meals and the correct time of
day to eat your meals. Another factor is the right attitude of the person
preparing the meal. For example, if the meal is made with love, it will resonate
with that frequency, which will have a healing effect when ingested.
Conversely, food prepared with a negative attitude will contain toxic energy
that can harm the system. And you always wondered why eating your mother's
or grandmother's cooking always made you feel so good.
Another essential point is to be in a calm mental state while eating the
food since food taken in a negative mood can have adverse effects. Think of
food as fuel while your digestive and energy systems are the engine and your
physical body is the main supporting structure, the vehicle's body. Therefore,
harbouring negative energy while bringing fuel into the system can poison the
fuel, exacerbating and heightening your negativity, and even imbuing it into
body cells and tissue. As such, cellular degeneration and deterioration can
occur over time, contributing to disease processes, including cancer.
It would help if you also were mindful of seasons and climate so you can
adjust your diet accordingly. For example, an anti-Kapha diet should be
followed in the winter and early spring, while an anti-Pitta diet is more
appropriate for the summer and late spring. Finally, you should give an antiVata diet priority in the fall.
The Bi-Doshic types that have an equal ratio of two Doshas should
modify their diet by season. For example, Pitta-Kapha types should follow an
anti-Pitta diet in the summer and fall and an anti-Kapha diet in the winter and
spring. Conversely, Vata-Kapha's should implement an anti-Vata diet in the
summer and fall and an anti-Kapha diet in the winter and spring. Furthermore,
the Vata-Pitta types should follow an anti-Vata diet in the fall and winter and an
anti-Pitta diet in the spring and summer. Lastly, the Tri-Doshic types who share

relatively equal qualities in all three Doshas should follow an anti-Kapha diet
in the winter and early spring, an anti-Pitta diet in the summer and late spring,
and an anti-Vata diet in the fall.
Depending on the climate of where you live, certain diets will be more
appropriate for you, while you should avoid others. For example, damp, cold
regions should emphasise an anti-Kapha diet, while hot climates should
implement an anti-Pitta diet. Conversely, an anti-Vata diet is most appropriate
for cold, dry, windy climates.
Table 5 represents foods you should emphasise in your diet and ones you
need to stay away from. Foods that are not listed can be judged by comparing
them to related foods in each category. The rule of thumb to follow is that
favoured foods reduce the influence of a Dosha, while foods you should avoid
increase it. By following your prescribed diet, you are trying to balance your
Dosha(s), positively impacting the mind, body, and Soul and preventing disease
processes from occurring. Therefore, apply these diets along with other
considerations just mentioned.
TABLE 5: Food Guidelines for the Three Doshas
Vata Dosha

Food Type

Pitta Dosha

Kapha Dosha

Favour

Avoid

Favour

Avoid

Favour

Avoid

*Most

*Most

*Most

*Most

*Most

*Most

Sweet Fruit

Dried Fruit

Sweet Fruit Sour Fruit

Astringent

Sweet &

Fruit

Sour Fruit

Fruits

*Most Moist Sweet
Fruit

Apricots

Apples

Apples

Apricots

Apples

Avocado

Avocado

Cranberries

(sweet)

Avocado

Bananas

Berries

Berries (sour)
Cherries (sour)

Apricots

Bananas

Bananas

Pears
Dates (dry)
Figs (dry)

Dates

Cranberries

Berries

Dates
Figs (fresh)

Berries

Persimmon

Figs

Grapefruit

Grapes (red

Grapes (green)

and purple)

Cherries

Grapefruit

Cherries

Pomegranates

Dates (fresh)

Raisins (dry)

Figs (fresh)

Prunes (dry)

Limes

Kiwi

Cranberries
Figs (dry)

Grapes

Grapefruit

Watermelon

Mango

Lemons
Oranges (sour)

Mango

Lemons

Grapes

Melons
Oranges
(sweet)

Peaches

Peaches

Kiwi

Kiwi

Pears

Papaya

Pears

Mangoes

Pineapple
(sweet)

Oranges
Plums

(sweet)

Melons

Lemons

Pomegranates

Persimmon
Pineapple (sour)
Plums (sour)

Persimmons

Papaya

Limes

Prunes

Strawberries

Pomegranates

Pineapple

Mango
Melons (sweet)

Raisins

Prunes

Plums

Oranges

Raspberries

Raisins

Watermelon

Papaya

Peaches

Pineapple

Plums
Raisins (soaked)
Prunes (soaked)

Vegetables

*Vegetables

*Frozen,

*Sweet

Should be

Raw, or

& Bitter

Cooked

Dried

Vegetables

Vegetables

*Pungent
Vegetables
Beets (raw)

*Most

*Sweet

Pungent &

& Juicy

Bitter

Vegetables

Vegetables

Corn (fresh)

Asparagus

Alfalfa Sprouts

Artichoke

Carrots

Artichoke

Cucumber

Beets

Artichoke

Asparagus

Cabbage (cooked)

Beets
(cooked)

Eggplant

Asparagus

Olives

Carrots

Beet Greens

Broccoli

Chillies

Beets

Okra

Cauliflower

Broccoli

Brussel

Garlic

Bitter Melon

Parsnips

Sprouts

Potatoes
(sweet)

Chillies

Brussel Sprouts

Cabbage

Horseradish

Broccoli

Pumpkin

Cilantro
Corn (fresh)

Cabbage

Cauliflower

Mustard Greens
Olives (Green)
Onions (raw)
Potatoes (sweet)

Brussel
Sprouts

Seaweeds

Garlic

Cauliflower

Celery

Radishes

Cabbage

Squash

Green Beans

Celery

Cilantro
Corn (fresh)

Seaweed

Carrots

Tomatoes

Mustard Greens

Eggplant

Cucumber

Spinach

Cauliflower

Yams

Okra
Olives, Black
Onions (cooked)
Peas (cooked)
Potatoes (sweet)

Leafy Greens

Green Beans

Tomatoes

Celery

Zucchini

Pumpkin
Radish (cooked)

Lettuce

Jerusalem

Turnips

Cilantro

Seaweed

Kale

Kale

Watercress

Chillies

Squash

Mushrooms

Spinach (cooked)

Olives (Green)
Onions (raw)

Leafy Greens

Yams

Eggplant

Sprouts

Parsley
Peas (raw)
Peppers (sweet
& hot)
Potatoes
(White)
Radish (raw)
Spinach (raw)

Lettuce

Garlic

Squash

Tomatoes

Mushrooms

Green Beans

Turnips

Okra
Olives
(Black)
Onions
(cooked)

Kale

Watercress

Parsley
Peas (fresh)
Peppers
(green)

Leafy Greens

Yams

Pumpkin
Potatoes
(white)

Lettuce

Zucchini

Sprouts

Mushrooms

Squash

Mustard
Greens

Zucchini

Onions

Parsley

Peas

Peppers

Radishes

Spinach

Sprouts

Turnips

Watercress

*continued on next page
Food

Vata Dosha

Pitta Dosha

Type

Grains

Kapha Dosha

Favour

Avoid

Favour

Avoid

Favour

Avoid

Basmati Rice

Barley

Barley

Bread (with

Barley

Basmati

yeast)

Rice
Brown Rice

(short grain)

Brown Rice

Buckwheat

Basmati Rice

Buckwheat

Buckwheat

Brown Rice
Bread (with
yeast)

Couscous

Corn

Blue Corn

Corn

Corn

Couscous

Brown Rice
(long grain)

Oats
(cooked)

Durham Flour
Oats (cooked)

Crackers

Couscous

Millet

Crackers

Pasta

Quinoa

Granola

Crackers

Muesli
Oats (dry)

Granola

Wheat

Wheat

Millet

Granola
Oats (cooked)

Polenta

Millet

White Rice

Muesli
Oats (dry)

Pancakes

Rye

Muesli
Oats (dry)

Pasta

Pasta

Polenta

Polenta

Quinoa

Quinoa

Rye

Spelt

Rye

Spelt

Wheat

Spelt

Animal
Foods

Beef
Chicken (white)

Wheat Bran

Wheat Bran

Lamb

Chicken (white)
Eggs (white)

Wheat Bran
Beef

Chicken (white)

Beef

Eggs

Chicken

(scrambled)

(dark)

Duck

Pork

Eggs (fried or
scrambled)

Rabbit

Duck

Turkey (white)

Eggs (yolk)

Shrimp (small
amount)

Rabbit

Duck

Seafood
Turkey (white)

Rabbit

Venison

Lamb

Shrimp
Turkey (white)

Lamb

Venison

Pork

Venison

Pork

Seafood

Seafood
Turkey
(dark)

Dairy

Butter

Milk
(powdered)
Goat’s Milk
(powdered)

Butter
(unsalted)
Cheese
(unsalted)

Butter (salted)
Buttermilk
Cheese (salted)

Buttermilk

Butter

Buttermilk

Ice Cream

Cottage Cheese

Ice Cream

Cottage Cheese

Cheese

Cheese

Cream

Kefir

Ghee
Goat’s cheese
(unsalted)
Goat’s Milk

Milk

Cottage Cheese

Milk

Sour Cream

Soy Milk

Cream

Cream

Ghee

Cow’s Milk

Goat’s Milk
Goat’s Cheese
(unsalted)

Yoghurt

Ice Cream

Ghee
Goat’s Cheese
Goat’s Milk

Rice Milk

Kefir

Kefir

Rice Milk

Milk

Sour Cream

Sour Cream

Yoghurt

Rice Milk

Yoghurt

Legumes

Mung Beans

Aduki Beans

Aduki Beans

Lentils

Aduki Beans

Black-Eyed
Peas

Black-Eyed
Peas

Chick Peas

Tofu

Chick Peas

Chick Peas

Peanuts

Kidney Beans

Urad Dal

Lentils

Fava Beans

Kidney Beans

Tur Dal

Lima Beans

Urad Dal

Kidney Beans

Lima Beans

Urad Dal

Peanuts

Lima Beans

Mung Beans

Mung Beans

Peanuts

Pinto Beans

Pinto Beans

Pinto Beans

Soy Beans

Split Peas

Soy Beans

Split Peas

Soy Beans

Split Peas

Tempeh

Tempeh

Tempeh

Tofu

Tofu

Tur Dal

Nuts

Almonds

None

Coconuts

Almonds

None

Almonds

Brazil Nuts

Brazil Nuts

Brazil Nuts

Cashews

Cashews

Cashews

Coconuts

Filberts

Coconuts

Filberts

Hazelnuts

Filberts

Hazelnuts

Macadamia

Hazelnuts

Macadamia

Pecans

Macadamia

Pecans

Pine Nuts

Pecans

Pine Nuts

Pistachios

Pine Nut

Pistachios

Walnuts

Pistachios

Walnuts

Walnuts

*continued on next page
Vata Dosha

Food Type

Seeds

Pitta Dosha

Kapha Dosha

Favour

Avoid

Favour

Avoid

Favour

Avoid

Chia

Popcorn

Chia

Flax

Chia

Halva

Flax

Sunflower

Halva

Flax

Sesame

Halva

Tahini

Popcorn

Popcorn

Tahini

Pumpkin

Pumpkin

Pumpkin

Sesame
Sunflower

Sesame

Sunflower

Tahini

Spices/
Condiments

Basil

Horseradish

Cardamom

Basil

Basil

Chutney
(sweet)

Bay Leaves

Cilantro
Chutney
(sweet)

Bay Leaves

Bay Leaves

Kelp

Black Pepper

Cloves

Black Pepper

Black Pepper

Ketchup

Cardamom

Coriander

Cayenne

Cardamom

Mayonnaise

Cayenne

Cumin

Chili Pepper

Cayenne

Sea Salt

Cloves

Dill

Cinnamon
Chutney (spicy)

Cilantro

Tamarind

Chutney

Dulse

Garlic

Cinnamon

Vinegar

Chilli Peppers

Fennel

Ginger

Cloves

Coriander

Kombu

Horseradish

Chilli Peppers
Chutney
(spicy)

Cumin

Mint

Kelp

Coriander

Cinnamon

Rosemary

Ketchup

Cumin

Dill

Saffron

Mustard

Dill

Dulse

Tamarind

Mayonnaise

Fennel

Fennel

Turmeric

Nutmeg

Garlic

Garlic

Oregano

Ginger

Ginger

Paprika

Horseradish

Ketchup

Pickles

Mint

Oregano

Sage
Sea Salt (in
excess)

Mustard

Mayonnaise

Soy Sauce

Nutmeg

Mint

Tamarind

Oregano

Mustard

Vinegar

Paprika

Nutmeg

Parsley

Paprika

Rosemary

Rosemary

Saffron

Saffron

Sage

Sage

Soy Sauce

Sea Salt

Turmeric

Soy Sauce

Tamarind

Turmeric

Vinegar

Sweeteners

Fruit Sugar

White
Sugar

Fruit Sugar

Honey

Honey (raw)

Brown Sugar

Honey

Cane Sugar

Molasses

Fruit Sugar

Cane Sugar

Maple Sugar

Cane Sugar

Maple Syrup

Raw Sugar

Molasses

Molasses

White Suger

Maple Syrup

Raw Sugar

Oils

Almond

White Sugar
None

Coconut

Corn

Almond

Avocado

Avocado

Olive

Flaxseed

Corn

Canola

Canola

Sunflower

Safflower

Sunflower

Flaxseed

Coconut

Almond

Sesame

Olive

Corn

Canola

Safflower

Flaxseed

Sesame

Olive

Safflower

Sesame

Yogic Practices To Balance the Doshas
Once you have determined your constitution (Prakriti) using your Vedic
Astrology Birth Chart and Table 4, you can use this knowledge to modify your
Yogic practice to best fit your needs. As mentioned, most people align with one
Doshic type, although it is not uncommon to have traits of several. Regardless,
once you have worked out your Vata-Pitta-Kapha ratio or simply your
dominant Dosha, you can use that information to determine which Yogic
practices are best for you to balance your mind and body.
Asanas can either increase or decrease your Dosha. Some have a
grounding and calming effect, while others are energizing. Some Asanas
stimulate the digestive system and heat up the body while others cool it down.
The same goes for Pranayamas and Hand Mudras. However, some of the more
basic Pranayama exercises, including the Four-Fold-Breath (Sama Vritti), can
be used by all Doshic types.
Use the following information as general guidelines for working with the
Asanas, Pranayamas, and Hand Mudras from this book to get optimal results.
(For various Beginner, Intermediate, and Advanced Asanas, refer to pages 312318.) Also, keep in mind that the guidelines below are not fixed and should be
adjusted according to changes in weather, climate, diet, and one’s psychology.
Also, not every Yogic exercise is included in the guidelines, which
generally means all Doshic types can use it. Before starting any Yogic practice,
though, make sure to read its description and precautions thoroughly. Allow
your Higher Self to guide you in this process while following the instructions
as they are given.
Head Mudras, Postural Mudras, Lock Mudras, and Perineal Mudras are
generally concerned with specific Spiritual aims. These include awakening the
Chakras, activating the Bindu, utilizing the Ambrosia nectar (Amrita) dripping
from the Bindu, stimulating the Kundalini into activity, and ensuring that the
Kundalini pierces the Three Granthis on its upwards rise (as in the case of
Bandhas). Therefore, all Doshic types should implement their use to obtain
their particular goals. In addition, Mantras and meditation techniques also have
specific aims that are beneficial for you, irrespective of your Dosha.

Yogic Practices for Vata Dosha
Vata types will significantly benefit from a grounding, calm, and
contemplative Asana practice, which will counter their tendency to feel spaced
out and agitated. For example, Vrksasana (Tree Pose) and Tadasana (Mountain
Pose) plant your feet into the ground, which reduces anxiety and nervousness
that Vatas are prone to. Virabhadrasana I and Virabhadrasana II (Warrior I and
II) accomplish the same thing while building strength. Utkatasana (Chair Pose)
is good to ground the Vata while building heat in the body.
Fast-paced flow sequences (Vinyasas) build heat in the body and
aggravate Vata types, who are naturally prone to fatigue and burn-out. Instead,
Vatas should move slowly and deliberately using the Hatha Yoga approach that
extends the length of time poses are held. In addition, Vatas should approach
transitions between poses with conscious awareness instead of being rushed,
ensuring that the mind remains balanced and calm. For example,
Virabhadrasana III (Warrior III) is a powerful balancing Pose that forces the
Vata to focus and concentrate on one point instead of being all over the place
with their thoughts.
Poses that work on the colon, intestines, lower back, and pelvis balance
Vata types since they bring energy back into the torso base, Vata’s area of
operation. Since Vatas are prone to constipation, twists and forward bends have
a healing effect since they compress the pelvis. Also, hip openers and facedown backbends are beneficial for them. These include Balasana (Child’s
Pose), Bhujangasana (Cobra Pose), Paschimottanasana (Seated Forward Bend),
Baddha Konasana (Cobbler’s Pose), and Malasana (Squat/Garland Pose).
Dhanurasana (Bow Pose) also extends the lower back and puts pressure on the
pelvis.
Since Vatas naturally have weaker bones, looser ligaments, less fatty
padding, and are susceptible to pain, they should avoid some of the more
Advanced Asanas like the Salamba Sarvangasana (Shoulderstand), Halasana
(Plow Pose), Sirsasana (Headstand), Vasistha-sana (Side Plank), Pincha
Mayurasana (Forearm Stand), and Urdhva Danurasana (Wheel Pose).
Because of their unpredictable nature, Vatas should make Asana practise a
routine and perform it at certain times on specific days of the week. In addition,
they should implement a longer than usual Shavasana (Corpse Pose) when
starting and ending a practice because of its grounding effect.
Pranayamas that cool down the body like Sheetali (Cooling Breath),
Sheetkari (Hissing Breath), and the Lunar Breath should be avoided. Instead,
Vatas can implement Pranayamas that increase heat in the body, like the Solar

Breath, Kapalbhati (Skull Shining Breath), and Bhastrika (Bellows Breath)
Pranayama. However, they need to be careful with the latter two since they
increase energy in the body, which can overstimulate the mind. In addition,
Vatas generally suffer from overthinking, anxiety, and stress, which is why they
should use specific Pranayamas to soothe and pacify the mind. These include
Anulom Vilom (Alternate Nostril Breathing Method#1), Nadi Shodhana
(Alternate Nostril Breathing Method#2), Bhramari (Humming Bee Breath), and
Ujjayi (Ocean Breath) Pranayama techniques.
Finally, Hand Mudras that increase Vata Dosha are Jnana Mudra, Chin
Mudra, and Akasha Mudra. These should be practised if one has a deficiency in
Vata Dosha. In contrast, Hand Mudras that decrease Vata are Vayu Mudra and
Shunya Mudra.

Yogic Practices for Pitta Dosha
Since Pitta types tend to overheat, they should avoid Yoga poses that
cause excessive sweating. In addition, they need to cultivate a calm and relaxed
attitude towards their Yoga practice instead of looking at it as a contest since
Pittas are drawn to physically demanding postures.
Pitta types will benefit from a cooling, heart-opening Yoga practice
performed in a non-competitive way. The Hatha Yoga approach is more
appropriate for Pittas over Vinyasa, focusing on more prolonged duration of
poses and slow, deliberate transitions. Beginner Poses like Bitilasana (Cow
Pose) and Bidalasana (Cat Pose) are good to balance Pitta and should be
practised in unison. Standing forward bends and heart-opening poses like
Ustrasana (Camel Pose), Sarvangasana (Bridge Pose), and Urdhva Mukha
Svanasana (Upward-Facing Dog) help reduce Pitta. Also, Trikonasana
(Triangle Pose) and Bhujangasana (Cobra Pose).
The seat of Pitta is the stomach and small intestine, which is why they are
susceptible to increased heat in the digestive tract. Forward-folds, twists, and
backbends like Balasana (Child’s Pose), Dhanurasana (Bow Pose) and Urdhva
Dhanurasana (Wheel Pose) help regulate Pitta and extract excess bile.
Conversely, side bends like Ardha Matsyendrasana (Seated Spinal Twist) and
Parsvottanasana (Intense Side Stretch) aid in relieving excess heat from the
internal organs.
Pittas should avoid Hot Yoga (Bikram and Vinyasa) and practise in a
cooled down, air-conditioned environment. In addition, they should avoid
holding long inverted poses that create a lot of heat in the head. For standing
poses, the best ones for Pitta open the hips, including Vrksasana (Tree Pose),
Virabhadrasana I and Virabhadrasana II (Warrior I and II), and Ardha
Chandrasana (Half Moon). Other beneficial poses that open the hips are
Baddha Konasana (Cobbler’s Pose), Uthan Pristhasana (Dragon/Lizard Pose),
and Parivrtta Uthan Prissthasana (Reverse Dragon/Lizard Pose).
Pittas should quietly focus on the breath when entering Shavasana (Corpse
Pose), which will calm the mind and centre them in the body and heart.
Likewise, they need to avoid Sirsasana (Headstand) since it heats up the head
too much. For inverted poses, they should practise Salamba Sarvangasana
(Shoulderstand) instead.
Since Pittas are naturally hot, they should engage in Pranayamas that can
cool them down, including Sheetali (Cooling Breath), Sheetkari (Hissing
Breath), and the Lunar Breath. On the other hand, Pittas should avoid
Pranayamas that raise more heat in the body like the Solar Breath, Kapalbhati

(Skull Shining Breath), and Bhastrika (Bellows Breath). Mind balancing and
calming Pranayamas are recommended, like those suggested for Vata types.
Lastly, Hand Mudras for Pitta Dosha excess are Prana Mudra, Varun
Mudra, and Prithivi Mudra. If you have a deficiency in Pitta, perform Agni
Mudra to increase it.

Yogic Practice for Kapha Dosha
For Kapha Dosha types, warming and energizing Yoga practice like
Vinyasa is ideal since they need to counter their natural tendency to feel cold,
heavy, slow and sedated by creating heat and movement in the body. However,
they need to gradually build their capacity instead of pushing themselves into
advanced postures. Although Kaphas have the most strength of all the Doshes,
they can suffer from lethargy and excess weight when they are out of balance.
Since Kapha’s area of operation is the chest (lung region), Asanas
designed to open up the thoracic cavity (ribcage area) will prevent the
accumulation of mucous. However, most standing poses are invigorating for
Kaphas, primarily when held for a more extended period. Backbends like
Ustrasana (Camel Pose), Dhanurasana (Bow Pose) and Urdhva Dhanurasana
(Wheel Pose) heat up the body and unlock the chest, allowing for better
circulation of Prana. Also, Setu Bandha Sarvangasana (Bridge Pose) and Ardha
Purvottanasana (Reverse Table Top) are beneficial. Unlike Pitta, Kapha types
can hold their backbends for a longer time.
Kaphas should be mindful to move through flow sequences quickly to
avoid being cooled down while practising conscious awareness. Twists and
stretches are good because they detoxify and strengthen the body and boost the
metabolism. These include Trikonasana (Triangle), Parivrtta Trikonasana
(Revolved Triangle), Ardha Matsyendrasana (Seated Spinal Twist), and
Pravottanasana (Intense Side Stretch). Poses like Salamba Sarvangasana
(Shoulderstand), Adho Mukha Vrksasana (Handstand), and Sirsasana
(Headstand) are the primary reducers of Kapha because of their tremendous
power to heat up the body. Navasana (Boat Pose) is excellent to ignite and
warm up the core and is recommended for Kapha types.
Kaphas should try to do their Yoga practice early in the morning to get
their metabolism going and keep them energized and motivated throughout the
day. The duration of Shavasana (Corpse Pose) should be kept a bit shorter for
Kapha types. Instead of practising Tadasana (Mountain Pose) for grounding,
Kaphas should perform Utkatasana (Chair Pose), Vrksasana (Tree Pose), or
Virabhadrasana I and Virabhadrasana II (Warrior I and II) instead since they are
more physically demanding.
Pranayama exercises that heat up the body and calm the mind should be
implemented. These include the Solar Breath, Kapalbhati (Skull Shining
Breath), Bhastrika (Bellows Breath) and Ujjayi (Ocean Breath) Pranayamas. In
addition, opening the lungs through vigorous breathing is beneficial. Kaphas
should avoid all Pranayamas that cool down the body like Sheetali (Cooling

Breath), Sheetkari (Hissing Breath), and the Lunar Breath. Instead, they can
use the mind soothing Pranayamas suggested for the Vata types if they feel
mentally unbalanced.
In conclusion, Hand Mudras for Kapha Dosha excess are Agni Mudra and
Varun Mudra. Prithivi Mudra can be used to increase Kapha if one has a
deficiency.
Yogic Practices for Bi-Doshic and Tri-Doshic Types
If the individual constitutes two dominant or three dominant Doshas, they
need to implement a practice that is a mix of each. Use the guidelines above for
each of the Doshas you are a combination of. A person can generally tell which
dominant Dosha seems out of balance. For example, if someone is a Vata-Pitta,
if they find themselves irritable and angry and digest their food too quickly,
they know to follow the Pitta guidelines to get this Dosha into balance.
Conversely, if they exhibit too much mental activity and general anxiety, they
should implement a Vata pacifying Yoga practice. Also, be mindful of the
seasons and weather. A Vata-Pitta type will need to balance Vata during the
colder, fall and winter months, while in the spring and summer, when the
weather is hotter, they will need to balance Pitta.

SIDDHIS-PSYCHIC POWERS
The subject of Siddhis, or supernatural powers and abilities, is largely
misunderstood in Spiritual circles and requires clarification. In Sanskrit,
Siddhi means "fulfilment" or "accomplishment," implying the gifts one
receives after completing the different stages or degrees of advancement
through Spiritual practices such as meditation and Yoga. Since the aim of all
Spiritual practices is Spiritual Evolution, Siddhis are psychic powers that
become unveiled as the individual integrates the Spiritual energy and raises
the vibration of their consciousness.
In the Yoga Sutras, Patanjali writes that Siddhis are attained when the
Yogi has achieved mastery over their mind, body, and Soul and can sustain
concentration, meditation, and Samadhi at will. Mastery over the Self is an
integral part of one’s journey towards Enlightenment, including governance
over the Elements. By obtaining control over our inner reality, we can exert
a mental force that affects the outer reality—As Above, So Below.
Although Siddhis can be achieved through Yogic practices and living
an ascetic lifestyle, a more accelerated way to their attainment is through a
full Kundalini awakening. I have already talked about the various Spiritual
gifts that unveil to the Kundalini awakened initiate during their
transformation process. Some of these gifts are attained initially, while
others are unlocked in the years that follow. Regardless of the stage of
attainment, all Siddhis are a by-product of the Spiritual transformation.
As the individual aligns themselves with Cosmic Consciousness and
integrates the high vibrational energy of the Spirit, they begin to experience
Oneness with all of existence. Since the Spirit connects us all, there is no
separation between us and the objects and people around us—we are all
One. Thus, the integrated Spiritual energy becomes the medium through
which we can experience extrasensory perception.
By optimizing our Spiritual Chakras (Sahasrara, Ajna, and Vishuddhi),
we can attune to the essence of the Spiritual energy, whose vastness stretches
out infinitely in all directions. As such, psychic abilities will begin to unveil
to us, including Clairvoyance, Clairaudience, Clairsentience, empathy,
telepathy, and other gifts resulting from a heightened perception of reality.

The process of consciousness expansion involves optimising the
Chakras via the White Light of the Spirit. We receive the Spirit through
Sahasrara while Ajna Chakra (Mind’s Eye) serves as our psychic centre and
Vishuddhi as our connecting link with the four Elemental Chakras below. It
is the interplay of Sahasrara and Ajna Chakra that yields most if not all the
Siddhis since Sahasrara is our connecting link with Cosmic Consciousness.
As you will see in the description of the Siddhis, many psychic gifts or
powers that one attains result from expanding one’s consciousness and
taking on the properties of Cosmic Consciousness.
Although Siddhis are gifts from the Divine, they can also hinder us on
our Spiritual journey if we focus on their attainment too much. Siddhis
should be experienced, examined, and let go of to allow the consciousness to
continue to expand to even greater heights. If the Ego gets involved and tries
to control the process or even benefit from the development of Siddhis, the
vibration of one’s consciousness will lower, blocking the way to further
advancement. In that sense, Siddhis are a "double-edged sword" that needs
to be approached with a proper understanding and the Ego in check.
As part of sacred texts, the subject of Siddhis and their description is
presented in a cryptic manner which is done purposefully to confuse and
divide the masses. On the one hand, we have the profane who only seek
these supernatural gifts to satisfy their Ego’s desire for power. These people
interpret the sacred texts literally, knocking on the door of the Cosmic
mysteries in vain. On the other hand, the sincere seekers of truth, who are
pure of heart and worthy of these Divine mysteries, possess the master key
to unlocking the hidden meanings in these sacred texts.
Ancient people veiled Universal mysteries and truths in metaphors and
allegories, including symbols and numbers that held Archetypal value. The
traditional method of passing down sacred knowledge was abstract and
subtle, bypassing the Ego and communicating directly with the Higher Self.
The Siddhis are also presented in such a fashion. On the surface, they seem
like incredible supernatural feats that defy the laws of physics. However,
when you apply the master key, you understand that their description is
metaphoric for inner powers unveiled through the evolution of
consciousness.

The Eight Major Siddhis

In Tantra, Hatha, and Raja Yogas, there are eight primary "classical"
Siddhis that the Yogi attains on their path to Enlightenment. They are called
Maha Siddhis (Sanskrit for "great perfection" or "great accomplishment") or
Ashta Siddhis, which means "eight Siddhis." The Ashta Siddhis are also
known as Brahma Pradana Siddhis (Divine attainments). As you will see in
the following descriptions of the eight major Siddhis, they directly result
from fully awakening the Kundalini and the Spiritual transformation that
follows in the years to come.
Ganesha, also known as Ganapati or Ganesh, is the son of Lord Shiva
and Goddess Parvati. He is known as the remover of obstacles, which is why
he is pictured with an elephant head. According to Hindu tradition, Ganesha
brings blessings, prosperity, and success to anyone who invokes him.
Ganesha is the representative of Muladhara Chakra, the abode of the
Kundalini. For this reason, he is often represented with the serpent Vasuki
wrapped around his neck or belly. However, an atypical depiction is with
him sitting, standing, or dancing on the five or seven-hooded serpent
Sheshnaag. Both Vasuki and Sheshnaag represent the Kundalini energy—the
ultimate remover of obstacles whose purpose is to maximize one’s potential
as a Spiritual human being.

Figure 149: Lord Ganesha and the Ashta Siddhis

Ganesha is also known as Siddhi Data—the Lord of the Siddhis (Figure
149). He is the one who bestows the Ashta Siddhis to the eligible individuals
through the Kundalini awakening process. In the Tantra tradition, the Ashta
Siddhis are considered as eight Goddesses who are consorts of Ganesha and
personifications of his creative energy (Shakti).
Anima and Mahima Siddhis
The first two classical Siddhis are polar opposites which I will discuss
together for better understanding. Anima Siddhi (Sanskrit for "ability to
become infinitely small like an atom") is the power to become incredibly
small in size instantly, even to the extent of an atom. On the other hand,
Mahima Siddhi (Sanskrit for "ability to become huge") is the power to
become infinitely large in an instant, even to the size of a Galaxy or the
Universe itself.
These two Siddhis arise from the individual consciousness expanding to
the Cosmic level after a full Kundalini awakening, allowing them to wilfully
expand or contract their Being so that they can become infinitely small or
infinitely large. Both of these Siddhis are also influenced by the heightened
imaginative abilities that develop during the Kundalini transformation. It is
the coupling of imagination and expanded consciousness that activates
Anima and Mahima Siddhis within us.
Anima Siddhi requires that the individual imagine something in their
heads, such as an atom. By holding its vision, the Astral sense becomes
activated, enabling the individual to feel the Atom's essence, thereby
knowing its purpose and function in the Universe.
Conversely, if the individual visualizes something grand in size, such as
our Solar System or even the Milky Way Galaxy, their Being can stretch out
to its size to feel its essence (Mahima Siddhi). These abilities are possible
because the foundational substance of the Cosmic Consciousness, the Spirit,
is elastic and malleable, allowing those who have attained its level to assume
its form and fluctuate in size to any degree they desire through imagination
directed by willpower.
The second interpretation of Anima Siddhi deals with the legendary
"Cloak of Invisibility" mentioned in many Ancient traditions—the ability to
become energetically undetectable to other people (including animals) at
will. As the full spectrum of the inner Cosmic Planes becomes activated
after a full Kundalini awakening, the individual can raise their consciousness
willfully to a Higher Plane (Spiritual or Divine). Doing so allows them to

neutralize (still) their vibration to appear invisible in the Lower Planes
(Mental and Astral) that the average person vibrates on, rendering the person
"small as an atom."
If we follow the same logic, Mahima Siddhi allows the individual to
willfully heighten their vibration to appear grand in size to other people,
even Godlike. Remember, both Anima and Mahima Siddhis result from
Spiritual Evolution, whose purpose is to bring us closer and closer to the
Mind of God and assume its vibration. In both interpretations of the Anima
and Mahima Siddhis, the prerequisite of their development is for the
individual to master the Elements, namely the Fire Element.
Anima and Mahima Siddhis' more general interpretation is as
metaphors for the Spiritual power the individual achieves when they have
expanded their consciousness to the Cosmic Level and have achieved
Oneness. With Anima Siddhi, one can enter into anything they desire, such
as an object or a person, when they become "the size of an atom." In
contrast, by becoming infinitely large (Mahima Siddhi), the individual can
feel the essence of the entire Universe since they infinitely stretch out their
consciousness. We see in both cases the inner power that gets awakened
when an individual has integrated the Spiritual consciousness and can step
out of their physical body at will.
Garima and Laghima Siddhis
The third and fourth classical Siddhis are also polar opposites as the
first two. Garima Siddhi (Sanskrit for "ability to become very heavy") is the
power to become infinitely heavy in an instant by using your willpower.
Conversely, Laghima Siddhi (Sanskrit for "ability to become very light") is
the power to become infinitely light, therefore almost weightless. As Anima
and Mahima Siddhis dealt with size, Garima and Laghima deal with weight,
which is the force of gravity that acts upon an object's mass.
By becoming as heavy as one desires through Garima Siddhi, the
individual cannot be moved by anyone or anything—other people's
vibrations bounce off their Aura as they remain firm in their poise. Garima
utilizes the power of virtues, morals, and having an "Iron Will." People who
allow their Inner Light to guide them consciously choose Spiritual Evolution
over satisfying their Ego's desires and bringing unnecessary Karma into their
life. Moral values give people a purposeful existence and unshaken
willpower. They allow people to vibrate at a higher frequency by aligning
them with the higher Cosmic Planes. These righteous people avoid the

Lower Planes' energetic effects, rendering them unmoved emotionally and
mentally, especially when other people's vibrations bombard them with their
lower vibrations.
To fully maximize Garima Siddhi’s potential, the individual needs to
optimise their Spiritual Chakras and attune their willpower with their True
Will that only their Higher Self can bestow upon them. The True Will's
vibration is so high that if one becomes receptive to it and allows it to guide
their consciousness, they will neutralise their own lower vibrations and all
vibrations being directed towards them from the environment. By
maximising your willpower, you become a Master Manifester, a Selfsustaining, All-expressing, conscious Creator of your inner reality that is like
a God-human to all people who haven't developed the same power.
Laghima Siddhi, on the other hand, makes one almost weightless,
enabling levitation and even flying. On the surface, Laghima Siddhi defies
the law of gravity and laws of physics. It greatly appeals to the uninitiated
who seek these Siddhis for personal, monetary gain. By achieving levitation
in the physical realm, many people desire to benefit financially by displaying
this phenomenon to the masses.
Like many people in my position, I have been fascinated with levitation
since I had the Kundalini awakening seventeen years ago. I desired this gift
not because I sought to gain from it financially but because I saw it as
tangible proof of the Kundalini transformation that I could show others to
inspire them to achieve the same.
However, after years of extensive research, I have concluded that
legends of levitation are nothing more than fanciful stories with no verifiable
scientific proof. In other words, a human being cannot lift off the ground and
defy the laws of physics by using psychic powers. The purported levitations
people have seen with their own two eyes are merely illusions of which there
are countless methods and techniques.
Instead, the concept of levitation is a veil to confuse the profane. It
reveals to the worthy initiates the powers that awaken within oneself when
the Body of Light is activated. The Body of Light, our second body, is
elastic and mouldable and does not adhere to gravity and physics laws since
it is weightless and transparent. Using our Body of Light, we can travel
within the inner Cosmic Planes and perform many miraculous feats such as
flying, walking on water and through walls, etc.

Our Body of Light is utilised during Lucid Dreams (which happen
involuntarily) and Astral Projection (which is consciously induced). Both
phenomenons are a type of Out of Body, Soul travel experiences that I will
discuss in more detail later when I devote myself wholly to the subject.
Another type of Out of Body travel is called Remote Viewing, which is
the ability to bilocate to a remote area on our Planet using the mind's power.
Remote Viewing is Astral Projection on the Physical Plane that uses the
Body of Light to travel somewhere on Earth and see what our two physical
eyes can't see by using the Third Eye. In early occult and Spiritual literature,
Remote Viewing was referred to as "Telesthesia," which is the perception of
distant events, objects, and people by extrasensory means. Secret
government programs reportedly used gifted individuals to seek impressions
about distant or unseen targets through Remote Viewing.
Prapti Siddhi
The fifth classical Siddhi, Prapti (Sanskrit word implying "stretching of
the body" or "power of reaching"), allows the individual to travel anywhere
instantaneously with the application of their willpower. Prapti Siddhi
perfectly follows Laghima Siddhi as the Body of Light’s ability to travel via
consciousness, using the Merkaba.
As discussed in a previous chapter, the Body of Light allows us to
travel inter-dimensionally within the various inner Cosmic Planes, which is
an expression of Prapti Siddhi. However, if we desire to travel to remote
places on Planet Earth, we can do so through the Physical Plane. On the
surface, this manifestation of Prapti sounds a lot like Astral Projection, but it
is not. Although the two are related, since they both use the Body of Light
for execution, Astral Projection is a technique that requires preparation and
is therefore not instantaneous like Prapti.
I have already discussed Kundalini awakening's optimisation of the
imagination and willpower, but I have merely touched upon the ability that
develops of experiencing thoughts in "real-time." A full Kundalini
awakening localises the Inner Light inside the brain, bridging the conscious
and subconscious minds. As the two parts of the mind become One, the left
and right brain hemispheres are unified, allowing for a pure, uninterrupted
stream of consciousness. This experience has a peculiar effect on one's
thoughts which become as real as you and me to the experiencer.
It takes a long time to tame the consciousness and gain control over
one's visualisation power, which involves optimising the willpower. Once

achieved, though, you will have the ability to consciously travel (bilocate)
anywhere you want and experience it as real the very moment you think it. If
you wish to travel to Egypt, for example, and see the Great Pyramid, you
merely have to visualise it, and your Soul will be projected there instantly
via the Merkaba. Or, if you need a break from your everyday life and want to
spend a few minutes on a beach in Mexico, you can visualise being on a
beach and experience it as real.
To get the most from this experience, when visualising something, it
helps to have a photograph or image of where you want to go to form the
most accurate vision of that place. You are then to hold the image in your
mind, which you will experience as real through your Astral senses.
I want to point out that Prapti Siddhi is only achievable after the
individual has completed the Kundalini awakening process, thus localising
the Inner Light within the brain. Other components necessary for this
Siddhi's execution are optimising Ajna Chakra, activating the Body of Light,
and maximising the spin of the Merkaba by unlocking the full potential of
the toroidal energy field. (Note that the Body of Light and the Merkaba are
used for any kind of Out-of-Body travel.) I will describe this phenomenon's
science in greater detail later on as I unravel more of the extraordinary
abilities that unveil themselves to the Kundalini awakened individuals.
Prakamya Siddhi
The sixth classical Siddhi, Prakamya (Sanskrit word implying
"willfulness" or "freedom of will"), gives one the power to achieve and
experience anything they desire. This Siddhi allows the individual to
materialize anything they want out of thin air seemingly and realize any
dream. If they wish to be somewhere or even be with someone sexually,
their desire is satisfied the moment they have this thought. Prakamya Siddhi
is characterized by the instantaneous fulfilment of one's deepest desires
through the application of willpower.
This Siddhi may seem like something out of a superhero movie on the
surface. The ability to manifest anything we desire instantaneously
transcends the limitations of the laws of the Universe and the laws of
physics. However, if we apply this Siddhi to the Lucid Dream world, then
we begin to understand the true potential of our experiences through the
Body of Light. The Lucid Dream world is as real to our consciousness as the
Physical World as far as experience is concerned.

During my seventeen years of living with awakened Kundalini, I have
experienced these types of gifts and much, much more. The Lucid Dream
world fulfilled all of my Soul's desires, which I began rapidly experiencing
three to four months after my initial awakening in 2004. I have found that
Prakamya Siddhi serves not only to fulfil your Soul's desires but to
extinguish them over time.
My life experiences have taught me that one of the most efficient ways
to overcome any desire within yourself is to engage in it until its energy is
drained out of you. Of course, I am referring to temporal Ego desires that fall
within the realm of normalcy and not unnatural desires such as physically
hurting other living Beings. One of the functions of the Lucid Dream world
is to extinguish the desires of the Kundalini awakened initiates whose
ultimate goal is Spiritual Evolution and union with the Godhead.
I would often project out of my body into wherever my Soul wanted to
go in the Lucid Dream world. I visited distant Stars and Galaxies and Interdimensional places on our Planet with strange Beings that I saw for the first
time. Often, I would "download" information from these Beings concerning
Creation's mysteries and the future of the human race in the same fashion as
Neo downloads new abilities and skills as computer programs in "The
Matrix" movie. In the span of one hour of dreaming, I could download the
equivalent of twenty books worth of information from intelligent Beings in
our Universe.
A handful of times, I became aware that I was downloading information
outside of me and could recall a sentence or two of what I was receiving. For
the most part, the information was cryptic, imparted to me through numbers,
symbols, metaphors, and Archetypes in either the English language or other
Earth languages.
When I was in the presence of what looked like Extraterrestrial Beings,
they spoke to me telepathically in their tongues, which somehow, I
understood. I could usually tell Extraterrestrials from other Beings such as
Ascended Masters, Angels, or other Deities because their appearance was
humanoid but clearly not human since some features were different.
I felt blessed and privileged to have made contact with other intelligent
Beings in the Universe through consciousness. After all, I had no other way
of obtaining the unique knowledge they imparted to me but through direct
experience, and my thirst for knowledge after awakening Kundalini grew
daily.

Over time, I naturally developed a technique of un-focusing my Mind's
Eye in a Lucid Dream to step into a reality which I term "hyperconsciousness," a state beyond the realm of human consciousness. As a
result, I often found myself somewhere I have already been in the real world,
only a futuristic version of the same place with never-before-seen objects
and technological devices. The scenery resembles an LSD or Peyote trip,
although different since it has a futuristic component.
For a while, when I projected into this futuristic world, I would hear
techno music inside my head that matched what I saw as if I was in a movie.
My jaws would clench as an ecstatic rapture filled my heart, trying to
integrate my visual. This hyper-reality taught me about parallel Universes
that our consciousness can experience through the Body of Light and the
Lucid Dream world.
I remember wanting to spend a month skiing and being unable to do so
in real life due to time constraints. That very night I found myself in a highclass resort in what looked like the Alps. The scenery was everything I
desired and more. I spent what seemed like a full month there, in terms of
the number of experiences, all within the eight hours of sleep that I was out.
When I woke up, I no longer felt the need to go skiing since that desire was
satisfied in my Lucid Dream.
I have travelled to other places in the world in the same fashion. If I
was somehow limited to travel in real life, I often found myself visiting that
place at night. The main difference was that time was transcended in the
Lucid Dream world. You could spend months and even years in a place in
the Lucid Dream world, equivalent to eight hours of sleep in real life.
After visiting many countries and cities in my dreams, I have found that
there are resorts and hot spots in the Lucid Dream world where other people
travel to if they need a "power" vacation. In addition, many individuals I met
on my Lucid Dream travels seemed too unique to be a projection of my
consciousness. Often, we would exchange personal information concerning
who we are in real life, although I could never verify someone in the real
world.
Over the years, my "command centre" or base of operations became
New York and Los Angeles, although they were different versions of those
same cities. Since I visited both cities in real life, I found that the feel was
the same in the Lucid Dream world, but they looked radically different with
different architecture and landscapes.

When I revisited either city in a Lucid Dream, it seemed almost
identical to the last time I was there in a previous dream. I even had an
apartment I owned in New York that I would come back to, and it was the
same as the last time I was there with objects where I left them. Interestingly,
a stream of memories would flood back from the previous time I was there
in a dream which meant that my consciousness was able to have different
life experiences in various places simultaneously as the real world.
Every time I entered the Lucid Dream world, I was aware of my
potential. I was light as a feather and could fly, levitate objects and project
my consciousness in a split-second from one place to another. I could also
manifest any partner I wanted to have sexual relations with, experience what
it is like to be ultra-rich and famous, fly a plane or drive a Ferrari, and much
more. When I would imagine something I desired, it usually would appear
right in front of me. The sky is the limit as far as what your Soul can
experience in the Lucid Dream world, and the fulfilment of your desires is
personal to you and you only.
Keep in mind that there is no concept of distance in a Lucid Dream.
When you think of an experience you want to have, you are immediately in
the act of having that experience, in a location which your Soul chooses for
you. The Body of Light contains the five senses of sight, hearing, touch,
smell, and taste, allowing for a completely realistic experience. We may be
experiencing the real world via the Body of Light as well, only through the
physical body's interface. The few times I tried virtual reality, I felt similar
sensations to what I have experienced in the Lucid Dream world.
One of the main differences between satisfying your desires in the
Lucid Dream world and the World of Matter is that there is no mind chatter
or guilt in the Lucid Dream world since it is a pure desire being fulfilled.
The mind chatter results from the Ego, which is directly linked to the
physical body and the material world. Since the Lucid Dream transcends the
physical realm, it is void of Ego; hence the mind is empty, allowing for a
most optimal Soul experience.
Vashitva and Ishitva Siddhis
The seventh and eighth classical Siddhis, Vashitva and Ishitva, blend
into one another, and as such, I will discuss them together as expressions of
the same power. Vashitva Siddhi (Sanskrit word implying "powers of
control") allows the individual to command their own and other people's

mental states via willpower. The individual can entirely influence the actions
of any person on Earth with Vashitva Siddhi.
Conversely, Ishitva Siddhi (Sanskrit for "superiority" and "greatness")
is the ability to control nature, biological organisms, people, etc. This
particular Siddhi gives the individual absolute Lordship over all of Creation
and makes them a God-human in other people's eyes. Ishitva Siddhi makes
one a Master of the Five Elements—a living Magus.
According to The Kybalion's Principle of Vibration, all things vibrate at
a particular frequency. Quantum physics corroborates this claim and adds
that every time we look at something in the outer world, we influence its
vibratory state. Ancient Hermeticists have known the power of the mind for
thousands of years. After all, the foundational Principle of The Kybalion is
"The All is Mind, the Universe is Mental."
If the Universe is a mental projection that is moulded by our minds,
then our thoughts and emotions are also a mental construct that we can alter.
Hermeticists have taught their initiates that willpower can be used as a
Tuning Fork to transmute our mental conditions and those of other living
Beings, even changing the states of Matter. They believed that if we can
maximise the power of the mind, we can obtain governance over other
people, the environment, and reality in general.
Vashitva and Ishitva Siddhis are expressions of mind-powers that can
be realised when the individual raises the vibration of their willpower and
thus their consciousness. Even though we can achieve Vashitva Siddhi by
applying Mental Laws, the only way to truly realise Ishitva Siddhi is through
Spiritual Evolution. Becoming Enlightened not only maximises the
willpower's potential, thereby optimising Vashitva Siddhi, but it also allows
us to surrender our will to the Godhead completely and align with its high
vibrational frequency. In doing so, we become Self-energised Tuning Forks
that induct everything around us with our high vibrations, changing the
mental and emotional states of all living beings and even altering the
vibrational state of immaterial objects in our immediate environment.
Since we constantly communicate telepathically, maximising our
willpower gives us the power of mind over mind, allowing us to completely
dominate other people. According to The Kybalion's Principle of Mental
Gender, "Gender is in everything; everything has its masculine and feminine
principles; gender manifests on all Planes." This Principle states that we

each have a masculine and feminine component of the Self—the "I" and
"Me."
The "I" is the masculine, objective, conscious, voluntary Force that
projects—the willpower. The "Me" is the feminine, subjective,
subconscious, involuntary and passive part of the Self that receives—the
imagination. The will, which is the Fire Element of the Soul, projects into
the imagination, thereby creating a visual image, an expression of the Water
Element. The Air Element is the thought, the medium of expression of
willpower and imagination.
The "Me" is like a mental womb that gets impregnated by the "I" to
create a mental offspring—the visual image." The "I" always projects, while
the "Me" receives. These dual cognitive components are a sacred gift given
to us by our Creator to be conscious Co-Creators of our reality. However, the
only way we can manifest our own desired reality is to use our willpower to
generate mental images to guide our lives. If we become mentally lazy, thus
rendering our willpower inactive, our existence will be guided by other
people's willpower, either directly or through environmental stimuli. Such is
the Law. The "Me" component must always be fueled by an "I," whether our
own or someone else's.
People who are conscious of these Mental Laws can raise the vibration
of their willpower to control their reality and affect the "Me" component of
other people, thereby making them think whatever they desire. By
influencing someone's thoughts, we invariably affect how they feel and what
actions they perform. Since these Mental Laws work on a subconscious
level, the person who is being influenced hardly ever realises they are being
mentally inducted. Instead, they believe that the inducted thoughts are their
own when, in reality, they are seeds planted by someone else. The psychic
phenomena of thought transference, suggestion, and hypnotism are examples
of using the Principle of Gender to affect other people's minds.
As I have discussed at great length in The Magus, any reality being
shared by multiple people is controlled by the individual who vibrates their
willpower at the highest frequency. The people who share this individual's
reality look up to them naturally and consider them their leader and guide.
These evolved people are charismatic, personable, and sexually attractive,
which has less to do with physical appearance and more to do with personal
magnetism. They usually communicate directly to the Soul, thereby
bypassing the personality and the Ego. These special people engage and

inspire others in ways that seem magical to those individuals who don't
understand the science behind the Universal Laws that are being employed.
The most efficient way to achieve Ishitva Siddhi and achieve Lordship
over Creation is to awaken the Kundalini and raise it to the Crown. When a
highly Spiritually evolved individual has raised the vibration of their
consciousness to the Spiritual Plane, they naturally dominate the Planes
below it that most people vibrate on. They also dominate the animal and
vegetable kingdoms which are sub-divisions of the Physical Plane.
It is not uncommon to see an Enlightened person walk among tigers,
lions, bears, crocodiles, poisonous snakes, and other potentially deadly
animals. We have all heard of this phenomenon before, but most people don't
know its science. By channelling the high-vibrational Spirit energy, which is
Light and love, these Spiritually evolved individuals have overcome their
own fear that triggers dangerous animals and makes them attack humans.
Thus, the awakened individual bypasses the animal's survival mechanism
and connects with their love energy, resulting in being embraced instead of
attacked.
A person whose willpower is resonating at the frequency of the Spirit
dominates all those who have not achieved the same state of consciousness.
These Spiritually evolved individuals appear as God-humans to the common
folk who swarm them to bathe in their intoxicating Light.
As a final note, it is possible to alter states of Matter with the
application of willpower and even make Matter appear and re-appear. The
Kybalion clarifies that if we raise the vibration of Matter, we alter its
frequency and thus its density and even state. However, since it requires a
great deal of energy to accomplish this feat with the mind alone, very few
Adepts in history have achieved this, some of which found themselves
central figures of religions. We have all heard the miracles of Jesus Christ,
where he turned water into wine and used five loaves and two fish to
multiply these items and feed 5000 people.
A more common and provable example of altering Matter with the
power of the mind is to turn ice into water, water into steam, and vice versa,
by heating and cooling the body. Another example is levitating a light object
such as a piece of paper or controlling the movement of a candle's flame. To
accomplish any of these mental feats, the individual needs to contact or be
close to the item to infuse it with their Pranic energy, whose flow and state
they can control with their minds.

Perhaps in the future, when humanity has collectively Spiritually
evolved, we will have more remarkable examples of controlling Matter with
our minds, since the Universal Laws operate on all Cosmic Planes and the
Higher Planes always dominate the Lower Planes. Interestingly, the Ancients
never spent too much time trying to influence Matter with their minds. They
knew that the true gift of these Mental Laws was to apply them to their own
mental and emotional states to aid in their Spiritual Evolution. Reaching the
mind of the Godhead was their only true goal since by doing so, one
becomes a part of the Universal Laws, thus optimising the Ashta Siddhis.

PART VII:
POST-KUNDALINI AWAKENING

SYMPTOMS AND PHENOMENA
AFTER AWAKENING KUNDALINI
Most Kundalini awakened individuals are concerned about how the
transformation will unfold over time and the general timeline of when they
will unlock particular gifts (Siddhis). This is one of their main questions and
interests. After talking with dozens of awakened individuals who completed
the process by raising the Kundalini to the Crown, I have found that the
manifestations are almost the same for everyone and usually happen
systematically. One experience gives rise to the next one, and in this way, the
Kundalini energy transforms the mind, body, and Soul over time, unlocking
many psychic gifts along the way.
As I discussed in the introductory chapter on the Kundalini, once the
activation of the Body of Light has taken place and the energy becomes
localized in the brain, a permanent awakening has taken place. Some
symptoms and phenomena manifest within the first week, while others take a
bit longer than that. In this section, I will break down these experiences one
by one, in sequential order for the most part, from the initial stages, into the
following months and years. Keep in mind, however, that I am only covering
full awakenings, not partial ones. With partial awakenings, the
manifestations and gifts are specific to whatever Chakra(s) the Kundalini has
activated, varying from one Chakra to the next.
In fully awakened individuals, the first two initial manifestations are the
Light in the head and the constant vibratory sound heard on the inside akin
to a low hum. If the person has no prior knowledge of the Kundalini, they
may mistake the latter phenomena as the onset of tinnitus, a physical ailment
where you hear a constant ringing in your ears. However, they will notice
that the sound greatly amplifies when they focus on it, sometimes keeping
them up at night as it did for me.
The Light in the head is tricky because it comes in waves at first and
may even cause pressure in the head, causing a headache or migraine. So,
you might think several factors could be causing this phenomenon at the
beginning. After a few weeks, however, it will become apparent that once
you close your eyes, energy is present inside your head that flashes Light

frequently. It often pulses like a living, breathing organism, especially when
you are in an inspired state. You might even experience Light flashes of
other colours, especially purple, although I have found that the presence of
the White Light is relatively consistent. Of course, it is not as bright as
looking at the Sun but dim yet very noticeable with eyes closed.
You may also see orbs of Light within your peripheral vision that may
appear when you have an epiphany about something or are in an inspired
state. They are generally electric blue and small but quite noticeable. It is
usually a single orb of Light, although there can be several. People have
suggested that these orbs may be Guardian Angels.
As you begin bringing food into your body, your digestive system will
transform it into Light energy, feeding the newly awakened energy system.
Since the Kundalini is amplified by Pranic energy from food and sexual
energy, it will gradually change you on all levels, physical, mental,
emotional, and Spiritual. Some of the more immediate effects are body
twitches and a feeling of ants crawling on your skin. It is important not to
panic when this occurs, as it is a normal part of the process. It means that the
energy is sublimating and reaching the nerve centres, literally infusing them
with Light, fueling them.
You might also feel muscle jerks or occasional spasms come seemingly
out of nowhere, usually when your body is still and in a relaxed state. As
your nervous system adjusts to this new energy present within you, your
temperature can fluctuate, making you feel hot one moment and cold the
next. I recommend wearing extra clothing not to make yourself susceptible
to getting a cold or flu when you are cooling off.
The rate and power of your heartbeat will also be affected as your body
adjusts to changes in your energy system. The heart can beat so fast
sometimes that it feels like you are about to have a heart attack, especially if
you are unaware of this common Kundalini symptom. Because the mind is
processing emotions from the subconscious, the accelerated heartbeat is
usually the result of a fearful emotion present, which may appear out of
nowhere and be gone the next second. As a result, the heart will often skip a
beat; then, it will speed up until you calm yourself down.
The heart will also react when intense emotions are present, especially
ones that channel raw Fire energy. The power of the heartbeat can sometimes
be so strong that it feels like it is trying to come out of your chest. Your
respiration rate is directly affected by changes in your heart rate, often

resulting in mild hyperventilation when your heart rate goes up. Since your
Sympathetic Nervous System activates in this case, I recommend
implementing a calming breathing technique to take back control over your
body. Keep in mind that however alarming these heart palpitations may
seem, there is nothing to fear. The mind makes matters worse by creating
panic, so try to remain calm, and it will pass.
Since the Kundalini is now active within you permanently, you may
also feel pulsations in your sacrum as it is pumping the Kundalini current
through your Light Body. If there are energy blockages, there might be
uncomfortable pressure in the sacrum, which may cause mild pain. However,
I have found that the Kundalini system compensates for energy blockages by
reducing the magnitude of the Light it is channelling.
Another notable phenomenon, albeit a rare one, is psychokinetic
interference with electrical equipment. For example, the day after I had the
Kundalini awakening, my bioelectricity was so high that when I focused my
mind on a nearby TV, I caused a disturbance in the channel stream on
command. I had also heard of cases where individuals blew out the needle
on their record player when they touched it or made CDs skip. The
phenomenon always entails either making contact with an electrical device
or using the power of the mind to alter its function in some way while
exhibiting higher than normal bioelectricity.
Sometimes, pain is present in different organs, or there is a general
sense of discomfort in areas where organs are present. The pain is usually
mild, although the mind might exaggerate these effects, as it does when it
experiences fear of the unknown. The mild pain or discomfort is normal, and
it means that the energy is entering into and cleansing different Spiritual
counterparts of the organs and parts of the body. The most important thing to
remember is to remain calm as all of these processes occur because they
usually don't last long. However, if you fixate on them and blow them out of
proportion, they will persist longer.
Let me reinstate what I said in an earlier chapter—the Kundalini energy
works on a subtle, non-physical level, although it often may feel like the
effects are physical. Keep in mind that another part of you is awakening to
your consciousness, the Body of Light. The Body of Light has subtle
counterparts to the physical organs, which serve a Spiritual purpose on a
higher level.

I hope this explanation clears up any misunderstandings on this topic
because I often hear Kundalini awakened people say that the energy is
working in the physical body and shaping and "hammering" the organs,
which is simply not true. It feels like it, yes, but that is only because now
there is another part of the Self awakened, a non-physical component—the
Body of Light, which contains the various Subtle Bodies that correspond
with the Five Elements.
Another symptom that occurs early on is massive fluctuations in
vitality. For example, you may be hyperactive and feel a need to move
around or exercise, followed by complete energy depletion and lethargy.
These energy swings result from Kundalini's effects on the mind. When it
takes over, the Kundalini gives you access to an abundance of energy,
followed by a crash the moment the Ego takes back its control over the
mind. When you learn to overcome the Ego's effect on the mind, however,
you will tap into the source of the Kundalini energy and have incredible
vitality 24/7.
As your consciousness purifies over time, its vibration rises, enabling it
to localize within the Spiritual Body, the highest aspect of the Body of Light.
It is almost like a transplant process is occurring inside, which may be
worrying at times. As such, it may require some time to adapt to what feels
like a foreign entity inside of you.
The Body of Light is the vehicle of the Soul. The physical body, on the
other hand, is the vehicle of the Ego. The Soul uses imagination and
intuition, which are received through the heart. The Ego uses logic and
reason, and it operates through the mind. The sibling of imagination is the
inspiration that fuels the Higher Self, the Soul. The Kundalini energy
inspires because its purpose is to bring you in-Spirit. The Kundalini Fire
changes states over time to bring about a mystical, transcendental perception
of the new reality you are in—the Fourth Dimension of Energy or Vibration.

Holy Guardian Angel (The Higher Self)
Every human being has a Higher Genius, otherwise known as the Holy
Guardian Angel, or Higher Self. This is the Spiritual part of you that is of
God-the Creator. Although beyond duality, your Higher Self aligns with the
polarity of your Soul. As such, you can refer to it as a he or she, whatever
gender your Soul is. The primary purpose of the Kundalini awakening is to
create a link between your consciousness and your Holy Guardian Angel.

Then you will become a channel for their wisdom for the duration of your
life here on Earth. And quite possibly beyond.
Your Holy Guardian Angel resides in Sahasrara Chakra (Figure 150).
Whenever you raise your consciousness to its level, your Higher Self is
present. By connecting with it, your consciousness feels as if it has grown
wings, transforming you into an Angelic presence while this link is
maintained. You are still yourself, but a higher part of you that resonates
with the vibration of the Divine Light of the Creator.

Figure 150: Holy Guardian Angel (The Higher Self)

Most people have moments throughout the day when they connect with
their Holy Guardian Angel, usually when in an inspired or creative state of
mind. Then there are those moments when the Holy Guardian Angel briefly
touches us with its energy, giving us Divine insight into a subject in the form
of an epiphany. However, these moments are usually short-lived since the
Ego always begins to question the experience, severing the connection with
the Higher Self. As a result, the individual drops down from Sahasrara into a
lower Chakra of one of the Four Elements.
To establish a permanent connection with your Holy Guardian Angel,
an exaltation of consciousness must take place first. Then, once the Soul has
assumed complete dominance over the Ego, the Spirit Element can descend
and transform you entirely. After this transfiguration process is complete,
you will permanently establish contact with the Holy Guardian Angel. You
may still operate from any Chakra when you require its powers of
expression, although your consciousness will mainly work from the three
Spirit Chakras of Vishuddhi, Ajna, and Sahasrara.
Much of the Kundalini content in in this book is not something I
learned from other books or heard from someone else, which is why you will
find that a lot of this information is original. Some knowledge has been built
up from books during the first number of years after awakening Kundalini.
Once the foundation had been laid, and I aligned with the Higher Genius, he
took over as my inner teacher and guide. Afterwards, most of my knowledge
was imparted to me directly by my Holy Guardian Angel through Gnosis.
However, to reach that pinnacle in my Spiritual Evolution where I can
become a channel to something greater than me, I had to spend many years
developing myself into a beacon and channel of Light.
Every human being can become a channel for their Higher Self if they
dedicate themselves to their Spiritual journey and follow some road map of
achieving Enlightenment. We must all become Resurrected in the Spirit
Element and become our own saviours. The work in The Magus is geared
towards achieving that goal. Once you have gained permanent contact with
your Holy Guardian Angel, they will become your teacher and guide for the
rest of your life. You will not need any more teachers, nor guides in physical
form as you will become the teacher and student in one.
Your Holy Guardian Angel will begin to communicate with you every
time there is a continuation in consciousness, and your Ego is silent. It will
teach you about the mysteries of the Universe and Creation regularly as you

go about your daily life. It will give you further insight into everything you
learned in the past and everything you think you know now. Whatever you
take in from the outside world will now be filtered by the wisdom of your
Holy Guardian Angel.
You may continue learning from books, although you will find that you
will get more from your Holy Guardian Angel about life than you can from
any written texts. Books are good to build up your knowledge concerning
specific subjects, but your life philosophy you will learn directly from your
Holy Guardian Angel.
Since you cannot control this ongoing communication and learning
process, you will begin to feel like you are two people in one. I often find
myself talking to my Higher Self like two entities are living inside of me.
The cool, calm, collected, and all-wise one is the Higher Self, while the Ego
is the one that messes up and needs guidance. And the way I see it, I am
neither of them and both of them at the same time.
My Ego used to feel like the consciousness that it once ruled over was
hijacked by something else, although nowadays, it has accepted this dual
reality of the Self. It still has its reactions like any Ego does, but the Higher
Genius stands aside, watches how I express myself and checks me when I
get out of line. He is the Silent Witness of the perpetual present moment that
lives in Eternity. He is there to calm me down when I need it and give me the
right advice on what to do or how to behave when I am in a dilemma. His
overall purpose is to teach me how to improve my character and personality
to become more Spiritual. So, I leave myself in his hands and try to let him
lead the way for the most part.
Your Holy Guardian Angel is essentially self-serving; it is constantly
teaching you how to become a better channel for its Light, even if the Ego
must suffer. As you learn to serve your Higher Genius, however, you are
invariably learning how to serve God-the Creator, which means you are
Spiritually Evolving. Since your Higher Genius is your God-Self, its impetus
for action comes directly from the Source of all Creation.
What is fascinating about Kundalini science and philosophy is that it is
a new and growing field whose foundation and framework haven’t been
established yet. Therefore, it is up to all Kundalini awakened individuals to
contribute their knowledge and experience for the generations ahead of us to
continue building upon. If I can assist in helping you gain contact with your
Holy Guardian Angel, then I have done my job. The rest I leave in their

hands. As such, I urge all of you to take what you have learned from me and
continue to develop my theories and practices further.
No book or body of knowledge on the Kundalini has the ultimate
answers. There are always gaps to be filled. As such, I invite all Kundalini
awakened individuals to be courageous and step outside their comfort zones
to help develop this Kundalini science further. We are all scientists and
laboratories in one package, learning, experiencing, and sharing our findings
with the world.

State of Being After the Awakening
After a full Kundalini awakening, once the Body of Light has been
activated, it may take some time to develop it sufficiently with food intake.
The next step is to allow the Spirit energy to permeate the consciousness so
that you can align fully with the Spiritual Body, an aspect of the Body of
Light. To accomplish this, however, you must first overcome the Karmic
energy in your lowest four Chakras and sufficiently develop the top three
that are of the Spirit Element.
The Spiritual Body is shaping itself as the Body of Light is being
integrated. How long this process takes depends on many factors, which are
personal to everyone. It is a rather lengthy process, and if I had to take an
average guess, I would say seven to ten years. If you have a method to work
on the Chakras, such as the Spiritual Practices in this book or Ceremonial
Magick ritual exercises as presented in The Magus, then it will take
substantially less time. On the other hand, if you allow the Kundalini to
purify the Chakras over time naturally, it will take much longer.
Overcoming fear is the key to Spiritual Resurrection, which includes
purging and purifying the Chakras. It took many years for negative energy to
develop within the Chakras; it will invariably take many years to cleanse.
How long exactly? It all depends on how much fear you have in your
system.
I know people who, after a dozen years of living with awakened
Kundalini, are still at the mercy of their fear and anxiety, which has been a
foreign concept to me for almost a decade now. I often get fearful thoughts,
as we all do, but for me, it is a momentary experience that is washed away in
the realm of Non-Duality of the Bindu Chakra within seconds. No fearful
thought or emotion can debilitate me or take over my consciousness long
enough for me to be overly bothered by it.

A few weeks to a few months after the initial Kundalini awakening, you
will feel a sense of energy moving inside the body and the head, and you
may feel like your brain is "broken." This state of mind will result in
scattered thoughts and the complete inability to focus on anything for too
long. Also, most people report feeling complete apathy for everything that
they used to care about.
Feelings of love for others will be overtaken by an emotional numbness
that will be long lasting and seemingly permanent. There will be no
continuity of thought, and a general sense of confusion will be present. You
can't turn to the Ego for answers anymore since it will have minimal control
over you. The Ego realizes it is slowly dying as this inner Fire is released
through the Kundalini. You have to surrender to this process right away
instead of trying to fight it or rationalize it too much.
Unfounded fears and anxiety will surface at different times, without any
reason other than to be released from the system. It may be scary at first, but
once you understand that it is all part of the process, it will be much easier to
relax and allow it to unfold.
Once the Kundalini reaches the head, a connection to different parts of
the subconscious form and a bridge is built between the conscious and
subconscious minds. Memories of the past might come to the forefront of
consciousness. This process is normal, and it doesn't need to be examined
too much. It would be best if you let these memories go as they come up.
Hanging onto some memory of pain or fear will only amplify it within the
mind. Instead, use the power of love in the Heart Chakra to purify and exalt
the memory through tears if needs be.
At first, because this is all such a new experience, it will be somewhat
uncomfortable, and the Ego will be trying in every way to figure out what is
happening. Having books such as this one on hand is crucial to knowing
where things are headed so you can relax. Strange manifestations such as
rushes of energy, muscle jerks, and feeling energies moving inside of you in
snake-like patterns are just a few of the possible experiences you may have.
There will be pressure felt in different areas of the body, especially the
head and the heart. You will also feel energy openings in the feet and palms
over time, bringing on a feeling of a cool, calm wind rushing into them. This
is the Spirit energy entering you to bring about the feeling of general
weightlessness, which may manifest shortly after.

Remember that even though the Spirit energy will seemingly permeate
your body early on in your transformation process, the actual integration of
your consciousness with the Spiritual Body can only occur once you have
cleansed your Chakras. And that process is entirely dependent on how much
Karmic energy you have stored in each Chakra. So if you are someone who
has very little Karmic energy, as you have been working through it through
many lifetimes, then you may be destined to have an easy-going and quick
transformation.
Another critical point is that once the conscious and subconscious
minds have been bridged, your thoughts will take on a degree of realness
like never before. Your thoughts will appear real to you, like whatever you
are thinking of is present right in front of you, which adds to the general
feeling of fear and anxiety. If you do not have complete control over your
thoughts, which most of us do not after the initial Kundalini awakening, fear
and anxiety are the defence mechanism against whatever comes up from the
subconscious mind.
This "realness of thoughts" occurs because the inside and outside are
now One. There is no break in consciousness unless you choose wilfully to
listen to the thoughts of the Ego. As all the Chakras are open, their powers
are streaming into your consciousness all at once. Your Sacral Chakra,
Swadhisthana, powers the subconscious, while the Heart Chakra, Anahata,
fuels the conscious mind. The Sun represents the conscious mind, while the
Moon represents the subconscious. For this reason, you see visual depictions
of the Sun and Moon in conjunction within many Spiritual pantheons and
traditions, primarily Hermetic Alchemy.

Chakras, Subtle Bodies, and Dreams
Within a few weeks after the initial Kundalini awakening, dreams start
to take on a different quality as the inner energies sublimate/transform
further. This noticeable change is seen in the dream world as the Astral Light
gradually builds up inside you. At first, your dreams will take on different
meanings, meant to teach you a lesson or inform you about something
Archetypal occurring in your subconscious. As you are progressing through
the Chakras, however, your dreams will be affected by the nature of their
energy. Your experiences begin in the lowest two Chakras, Muladhara and
Swadhisthana, as these two correspond to the Astral World. All inner

experiences start in the Astral World, through the Astral Body, otherwise
called the Emotional Body.
Once a scene takes place in your dream, you will have to figure out
what it means and what that scene is trying to communicate to you. Different
occult symbols, power animals, and numbers may be present as part of
metaphoric events that will impregnate upon your consciousness some life
lesson that you need to learn to move ahead on your journey of Spiritual
Evolution. These lessons also exist to help your Soul evolve and attune your
mind to changes in your Aura as they are happening. As you are progressing
through the lower three Chakras, the types of events occurring in your
dreams are meant to elicit an emotional or logical response in you that you
must examine afterwards. There will be different outside presences felt and
seen in your dreams, including Angels, Demons, and Deities, often clothed
in everyday garb and presenting themselves as people.
Once you have entered into the Heart Chakra, you can project out of
your body through Sahasrara, the Crown Chakra and experience the world of
Lucid Dreams. However, it is hard to precisely determine which Subtle
Plane a dream is taking place in and from which Chakra it is being projected.
Unless you are in a Lucid Dream, these dreams are happening
subconsciously where your consciousness is so engulfed in the experience it
is unaware it is dreaming. Therefore, the only real way to determine what
Cosmic Plane you are in is to examine the dream's content.
Keep in mind that in one given night, you may experience multiple
dreams in various Subtle Planes as your consciousness oscillates in rate or
frequency of vibration. You can sometimes hear the vibrational pitch inside
your head change as you enter different realms of the Inner World, the same
way as the radio frequency changes when you switch from one radio channel
to another.
Emotionally charged dreams are happening in the Earth and Water
Elements, Muladhara and Swadhisthana Chakras. Especially Swadhisthana,
since it corresponds to the Higher Astral or Emotional Body, although as
mentioned, the Muladhara Chakra also touches upon the Astral Plane. If the
content is more logical, where you have to figure out something in your
dreams like a detective, then it most likely is being projected through the
Fire Element, Manipura Chakra. In this case, your consciousness needs to
use your willpower and intellect in your dream to figure things out.

The Kundalini energy is trying to lay the foundation so you can start
Lucid Dreaming, otherwise called Astral Travelling. Lucid Dreaming only
occurs in sleep, while Astral Projection is an Astral Travelling technique that
you can induce in the waking state. It is essentially the same idea; you use
your Body of Light respective to the Subtle Plane you are trying to enter, to
consciously or unconsciously experience that Cosmic Plane.
The Subtle Bodies range in feeling the same sensations as the physical
body. The lowest Subtle Body, the Astral Body, is densest in the level of the
realness of experiencing that Plane, as it is primarily concerned with your
lower emotions. When you enter into the Mental Plane, though, things begin
to feel more real. In the Spiritual Plane, the realness of the experience is
greatly enhanced as the vibration of the Spiritual Body is substantially
higher than the Subtle Bodies of the Lower Planes. Experiencing the Divine
Planes is marked by intense ecstasy, which is the nature of those Planes.

Lucid Dreaming
About three to four months into the Kundalini transformation process,
you begin to Lucid Dream. Considering the awe and wonder of the Lucid
Dream world, this is one of the first Spiritual gifts that manifest for the
Kundalini awakened individual and a big step in their Spiritual Evolution
process. Lucid Dreaming results from the Kundalini energy entering the
Heart Chakra, Anahata, since this Chakra is the contact point with the Spirit
Element Chakras that lie above it.
In Lucid Dreams, the consciousness is completely liberated from the
physical body and aware that it is experiencing a dream. Pure consciousness
is the Law that guides Lucid Dreams. This awareness enables the individual
consciousness to be like a "kid in a candy store" and experience whatever
adventures your Soul desires. It is exhilarating to realise that you are in a
dream and can do whatever you wish by merely thinking it into existence.
Interestingly, the first thing people seem to want to experience in the Lucid
Dream world is flying through the air with the power of their minds. Since
your Body of Light is weightless, gravity is not a factor anymore, which
allows for this phenomenon.
Lucid Dreaming is a full Out-of-Body Experience that is quite a thrill
for the first time. It happens after enough Light/Pranic energy has been built
up through food intake, allowing you to vault out of your physical body
during sleep through Sahasrara, the Crown Chakra. Furthermore, this

experience has a liberating effect on consciousness. By entering these
Higher Planes of reality, no more fear or pain plagues you, which allows you
to relax for a change and enjoy this gift.
The Lucid Dream world is filled with beautiful environments and
scenes, all stemming from your enhanced imagination coupled with the
infinite potentiality of Cosmic Consciousness. By projecting out of your
body through Sahasrara Chakra, you enter the field of Cosmic
Consciousness, which is boundless. All Lucid Dreams feel like you are fully
present in whatever magical place you projected into, as your Soul feels
every sensation like it is happening to the physical body. However,
everything that is happening is a result of the imaginative capabilities of
Anahata, fueled by Sahasrara, whose source energy is Cosmic
Consciousness.
The Soul uses the Body of Light as the vehicle of travel in the inner
Cosmic Planes, enabling the consciousness to experience them as real. The
Body of Light is tied to the physical body by the Silver Cord (Figure 151),
also known as the "Sutratman" in Sanskrit, composed of the two words
"sutra" (thread) and "Atman" (Self). The Sutratman is essentially the life
thread of the Soul. This metaphysical cord ensures that our Body of Light
can make its way back to the body after Astral travelling. Upon death, when
the Soul leaves the physical body permanently, the Silver Cord becomes
severed.

Figure 151: Lucid Dream Projection

Astral Light Building Up and Expanding
As you begin to Lucid Dream regularly, you may start to experience
occasional dream paralysis where your consciousness is so engulfed in your
dream that you can't wake up for up to a dozen hours or more. This
phenomenon occurs due to the Astral Light building up inside your system
even more over time. At its peak, the Light energy can be so potent that it
involves your senses in such a way that the mind is experiencing everything
so completely real that it can't separate itself from the dream.
When I say the word "Astral," I am not relating to the Astral Plane of
the Earth and Water Chakras but how this term is commonly used in
Spiritual circles. "Astral" represents the inner Cosmic Planes, realms, and
worlds that are beyond the Physical Plane yet are inextricably tied to it. So
when you are trying to describe this invisible science to other people, you
may use the term "Astral" to encapsulate all the non-physical Planes of

consciousness. And "Astral Light" refers to the inner Light that manifests
these Cosmic Planes into existence.
It is crucial to understand that many of the different phenomena and
manifestations after the initial Kundalini awakening result from the
Astral/Inner Light growing and expanding over time within the energy
system. As it expands, it infuses the Chakras with Light energy,
systematically permeating and acting through the various Subtle Bodies.
Once it is finished infusing the Chakras of the Four Elements, it begins to
work on the Spiritual Chakras and the corresponding Spiritual Body,
injecting it with Light energy. Afterwards, the Astral Light of the Kundalini
transforms into liquid Spirit energy (Amrita), which then powers the Ida and
Pingala Nadis, or channels. As it does so, the Kundalini circuit will be
complete and continue sustaining itself through food intake. The Bindu will
become activated, serving as a valve that regulates the entire Kundalini
system, resulting in a metaphysical and mystical state of consciousness.
Approximately five months after my Kundalini awakening, as the
Astral Light continued to build up inside me, it changed my perception of
the Physical World. It transformed my physical sense of sight as Astral Light
started to permeate all objects around me, resulting in a shimmering, silvery
glow transposed on everything I was looking at. As discussed earlier, this
was the most wondrous manifestation and one that I continue to revel in to
this day. This gift gives me the illusion that the outside world is entirely
contained within my head, in my mind. When I focus my gaze outward,
there is a strange sensation like I am looking at the inside of my forehead.
During the Kundalini transformation process, the Astral Light building
up begins to awaken the different brain centres as well. It starts to channel
and circulate this Light in various parts of the head area as it does so. Once
my physical sight was transformed and the brain centres opened up, it
marked the beginning of a new life for me—the complete experience of the
Fourth dimension, the Dimension of Vibration. Every time I looked at the
world in front of me, I was reminded of the illusion of the material world of
Matter since I could now see the World of Energy underneath it.
As it transformed my visual sight, I also gained the ability to see
everything before me from a higher perspective, as if I am standing in the
clouds. Only now, what I was looking at also had this digital makeover and
Light beaming out from behind objects, completely remodelling what I was
seeing. Sometimes I could be so absorbed in what I saw that it would

dematerialize right in front of me, and I could see it as pure energy. And if I
continued my meditation further and got more absorbed in what I was
seeing, I could see everything before me as if it is projected onto a 2D
background, like a movie screen. The only difference is that the movie
screen is made of pure Light energy, projected from the Sun. This vision
attests to the theory that we are living in a Holographic Universe.

The Holographic Universe
During the first year after awakening the Kundalini in 2004, I had a
second Holographic Universe experience that furthered my understanding of
the nature of reality. This experience was like the first one that happened
during my Kundalini awakening although self-induced. It began as a dream,
with me standing alone in a field, surrounded by a wooden fence.
Everywhere I turned, I saw this fence. On the other side of the fence were
my Ancestors, all talking simultaneously in a chaotic manner in my native
tongue, Serbo-Croatian. Then, out of nowhere, a complete silence permeated
the atmosphere.
A voice appeared and said, "Do you want to know the truth of things?"
I responded with an affirmation, not verbally, but with curiosity in my heart.
The second I accepted this offer, the vibrational pitch inside my head began
to change. I found myself slipping into the vibration, losing consciousness
within my dream like I was being transported into another dimension of
space/time.
All my Astral senses became suspended as I went further and further
within myself. It felt like I was going through a wormhole via my
consciousness. Instead of fearing this experience, however, I had faith.
Finally, I emerged on the other side and opened my eyes. As I looked around
me, I saw the Holographic world. The walls and floor in front of me were
transparent, with objects seemingly suspended in space. The walls and
objects glowed with an almost velvet-like appearance. I didn't look at my
body during this time since I was so mesmerized by this concrete-less
reality. Complete silence was present everywhere. I felt like pure
consciousness, without limits, swimming in the darkness of space. However,
what was unique, and the first and only time this happened in my life, was
that the usual vibration pitch inside my head now sounded like a Mustang
engine, a low growling sound.
Although I was unsure whether I was on Earth or another Planet, the
objects started to look familiar as I looked around further. Finally, my
memories began to come back, and I realized that instead of being
somewhere new, I was sitting on my bed, in my room where I was sleeping a
minute before. This entire vision lasted for about ten seconds, although in
slow-motion. Once the memories started to come back, which began my
questioning of this extraordinary experience, the vibration in my head began

to shift until it came back to its usual frequency. As this was happening, I
saw the Holographic Universe turn to concrete Matter before my very eyes.
This experience was never to repeat itself in my life again. However, it
didn't have to. I got the answer I was seeking and never looked back. I
learned that not only are we living in a Holographic Universe, but the
vibration of our consciousness may hold the key to Interdimensional and
possibly even Interplanetary travel. This theory is supported by an ancient
text called The Emerald Tablets of Thoth the Atlantean, written by the
Atlantean Priest-King Thoth, of whom the Egyptian God Thoth is a
descendent. He mentioned that humans could travel throughout the Universe
by changing the vibration of their consciousness at one point in time, thus
validating my claim.
After my second direct experience with the Holographic reality, I was
left with new questions to be answered. For one, where is the Hologram
projected from in our Universe? One theory is that each Solar System has its
own Hologram that is projected from its Sun. However, some astrophysicists
support another hypothesis that the Hologram is projected from the nearest
black hole.
You see, a black hole has more mass than all the nearby Solar Systems
combined, meaning it carries massive amounts of data in a compact space.
This data is sent outwards to form distinct parts of the Universe, and
everything contained within that Three-Dimensional space, which is
reflected in the black hole's Two-Dimensional Plane, like a mirror. Now, if
one were to pass through the black hole, they would enter a higher
dimension, theoretically, exemplified in the movie "Interstellar" as the Fifth
Dimension of love that transcends space and time. Of course, these theories
are speculation only and will remain as such, but I have always felt
privileged to be one of the few people on this Planet that had not one but two
direct experiences with the Holographic reality.

Further Gifts Unveiling
Having the inner, Astral world open to me at all times was causing it to
be transposed onto what I saw with my physical eyes. As a result, I started to
see things that were not of this world as this Light energy was building up
inside me. I saw shadowy Beings in forests, Angelic presences, and even
Demonic ones, the most common of which growled and had red eyes. I saw
many of them in my dreams, while others were present in my environment,

and I could glance at them for a split-second before they were gone from my
sight.
My connection to everything around me grew daily. Through the
Mind's Eye, I developed another sense, the ability to feel objects I was
looking at intuitively. I could weigh their energy with my thoughts and feel
their Astral form, their Spiritual blueprint with this ability. These phenomena
were possible because the Kundalini completely awakened my Astral senses,
and I could see, touch, taste, smell, and hear within the Inner Cosmic Planes.
Since my Mind's Eye was exponentially expanded, I began exploring
regular meditations to see how far down the rabbit hole I could go and if I
could unlock further gifts within me. Thus, I began meditating everywhere I
went, whether on subways or busses, in class, or at work. I liked meditating
by focusing on people and allowing myself to get absorbed in their energy. If
I concentrated on a person long enough, I would slip out of myself and start
to see their energy emanating from their physical body. It looked directly
behind them, although it was a part of their consciousness. The experience
usually began with seeing their Etheric double, which looks like an imprint
of their energy field coming out a few inches from their physical body.
However, as I went in deeper and continued to un-focus my eyes as I viewed
their energy body, I would start to see the full spectrum of their Auric
colours.
If I remained in meditation for over ten minutes, though, I began to
change states of consciousness and could see the person from the perspective
of an ant, or sometimes a greater and even larger being. The rule of thumb
was that the longer I kept focusing on them, giving them my undivided
attention, the more I was able to scry into what I was seeing and see energy
fields that are typically undetected by physical sight.
If somebody was near me and I focused on their face instead of their
whole body, I could see their features change right before my eyes.
Sometimes they morphed into animal faces or became very old or young as I
focused on them. Other times their faces morphed into what looked like
Extraterrestrial Beings because they were simply out of this world. These
experiences affirmed for me that we are all Light Beings of pure
consciousness who have lived on many different Planets in other Solar
Systems and Galaxies in a continuous chain of lives that never ends.

Figure 152: The Human Brain Antenna
At this point, as I could feel the world around me, I was starting to
become an antenna (Figure 152), receiving vibrations from outside of
myself. The Kundalini was now beginning to operate from the Spiritual
Body. However, even though this happened relatively quickly in my life, it
did not mean that the Kundalini transformation process was complete. It may
start to work through the Spiritual Body, but as long as latent energies need
to be worked through in the Chakras, the Kundalini energy will stagnate, and
there will be a clear division in mind, body, and Soul. This dispersion of
Kundalini energy will result in a perplexed and lost state of mind for a long
time. Confusion and the inability to concentrate or make decisions are just a
few of the negative side-effects of being in this state.
I have never come across anyone who has purged the negativities of the
lower Chakras in a short period after a full Kundalini awakening. In reality,
it is possible, but this means the Soul has been purging and clearing the
Chakras well before the Kundalini awakening took place. To integrate fully
into this new level of consciousness in a small time-frame, you would have
to be a rather Saintly figure who has worked on their Karma from this life
and previous lives. Otherwise, there will still be many manifestations in your
mundane life where the Kundalini is working on your lower Chakras.
However, there have to be many lessons learned in those areas before the
Kundalini can completely localize in the Spiritual Body and operate without
blockages or stagnations in energy.

Kriyas and Synchronistic Events
Some awakened individuals report performing spontaneous Kriyas—
Kundalini Yoga and Hatha Yoga movements. This phenomenon occurs from
the Kundalini Light animating the physical body to perform these
movements while the conscious self is on autopilot. Interestingly, knowledge
of the Kriyas surfaces somewhere deep from the subconscious since they are
usually consciously unknown to the person performing them. The body
performs these Kriyas for a little while the Kundalini acts on the body,
energising it. The key behind this phenomenon is the individual being in a
state of inspiration, which neutralises the Ego. The moment that the

Kundalini Light dissipates, the Ego takes over the consciousness again, and
the Kriyas stop.
Another manifestation while in this Kundalini inspired state is
automatic writing. The individual may feel compelled to write, again
seemingly on autopilot while the Kundalini energy channels through them.
The produced content is often not recognizable to the Ego when examined
afterwards, begging the question of where it came from. The individual may
even express themselves in other languages, some not of this Earth. For
example, I have a Kundalini awakened friend who has been channelling
cryptic letters and symbols while in this inspired state that resembles some
dead Ancient language or even an Extraterrestrial one. Whatever he is
channelling, he feels compelled to do it and has no conscious control over
the process.
Many more manifestations will occur as the consciousness is learning
to live in this new world of pure energy, and the Ego is loosening its hold
over you. You will start to have many synchronicities and begin noticing
patterns in your daily life. For example, number patterns are common, which
often occur as you get some inner urge to look at the time or view some
technological device that displays numbers. For myself, the number 1111
came up very often. Other Kundalini awakened individuals report
synchronicities with the same number.
The purpose of 1111 is to let you know that you are now functioning on
a different Spiritual level and that awakening has taken place. The 1111
Angels, or Divine energies, want to let you know that you are being guided
and protected by higher forces. You may also see other strings or series of
numbers such as 222 or 333. This phenomenon occurs as the external,
material reality becomes interconnected with the inner Astral world—the
two are becoming One.
Your imaginative powers are blending into the Cosmic Consciousness
and its power of imagination which is vast and boundless. You are no longer
a separate entity but are now operating within the Cosmic Mind framework.
Your mind is gradually becoming absorbed into the Cosmic Consciousness.
As your consciousness slowly evolves, it is learning to operate
according to the framework of the Universal Principles. These Principles are
the Principles of Creation— the Seven Principles (fundamental Truths) that
outline Universal Laws which govern all of Creation. These Laws form the
basis of The Kybalion—the occult Hermetic book written at the beginning of

the 20th century that profoundly impacted me personally and was a
precursor to my Kundalini awakening, as mentioned in the introduction to
this work. You are learning to become a part of the Principles of Creation
and operate within their context consciously, as you form a part of the
Universal Laws.

THE NEED FOR SPIRITUAL ALCHEMY
There will be immense changes on the mental and emotional level
after experiencing a full and sustained Kundalini awakening. For many
people, a flood of negativity streaming forth into the consciousness may
occur, stemming from the Kundalini blowing open all the Chakras as it rises
from its abode in the sacrum through the hollow tube of the spinal column.
As fear and anxiety permeate your system, these dark energies will
need to be dealt with before you can experience the more positive aspects of
the awakening. The negative emotions are felt in the Water Chakra,
Swadhisthana, related to the subconscious mind. Negative thoughts,
however, are a result of a corrupted Air Chakra, Anahata. Keep in mind that
until you clear your negative thoughts and emotions, you cannot function
solely through intuition, which is one of the goals of the Kundalini
awakening process. Instead, you will feel weighed down by these dark
energies as they seemingly run your life.
The negative thoughts and emotions may appear foreign at first.
However, upon closer examination, you will realize they are your own. You
will also become attracted to other people's negative energies since like
attracts like. Often, you won't distinguish between the two since you will be
so open to other people's energies that they will feel like they are your own.
And to some extent, they are, since by being around others, we take on their
energy.
Generally speaking, communication is 93% telepathic for all of
humanity, which we express subconsciously, mainly through our body
language and voice tonality. After awakening the Kundalini, though, you
will consciously experience this higher form of communication since you
will have control over your vibrations. And since we are all constantly
inducing each other through the vibration of our thoughts and emotions,
when you gain control over your inner state, you can control the mind-state
of other people as well. But to achieve this, you will need to cleanse your
thoughts and emotions so that your willpower can dominate your
consciousness.
Early on in your transformation journey, you will notice it has become
challenging to be around some people in your life. These people are often

friends or even family members you used to spend a lot of time with before.
After the awakening, though, you may find that being around these same
people will make you anxious and stressed out. This phenomenon occurs
because of the negativity inside you since your own Demons will feed off
the fear energy projected by the Demons of other people.
Very negative-minded people, who are easily angered or overly
pessimistic about life, will become highly draining. As you are feeding your
Demons with the fear energy of other people, they will invariably rob you
of your Prana, your Life Force. Therefore, I advise you to reform your life
and limit contact with people who negatively affect you. You may be able
to go back to spending time with these people once you evolve Spiritually
past this negative state. Still, while you are overcoming your issues, it is
best that you only spend your time with positive-minded individuals.
You are no longer an average person, and you need to come to terms
with this. The faster that you accept that you need to help yourself, the
quicker you will evolve. If you choose not to deal with these types of
issues, you will suffer. It is crucial to adopt a confident attitude from the
beginning of your transformation because overcoming these challenges
imposed on by the Kundalini energy will make the difference between
winning and losing the battle inside of you. You can either be inspired about
your new journey or so down that you will hate yourself, your life, and
curse God for putting this Kundalini "burden" on you. It is common to feel
this way often at the beginning, especially if you had an unplanned,
spontaneous awakening.
It would be best if you started developing the mindset of a Spiritual
warrior right from the start. You must invoke courage and strength so that
you can face your Demons, and if they try to scare you, which they will,
you will remain unshaken in your poise. Fear-based beliefs, negative
thinking, and traumatic memories all have to be released and overcome in
this process.
Your Ego is slowly dying, and it knows it. You have to surrender to the
Kundalini energy and choose faith and love over fear. The concept of fear
and its effect on your energy system will challenge you for many years, but
in the end, if you remain positive and strong, you will prevail. Remember
that this transformation process is Universal; if you realize that you are not
alone in experiencing these challenges, you can draw inspiration from those
who came before you and overcame these trials and tribulations.

Challenges in Your Personal Life
As you are being remodelled in mind, body, and Soul and have been
given many consciousness upgrades, it means that you are now functioning
at a different level than other people. The faster you can accept this and
realise that concerning your family and friends, you will be unique and
different now, the quicker you can learn to adapt to your new reality
correctly. This adaptation comes with a certain sense of loneliness because
nobody you know will understand what you are going through. Let me
reiterate this critical point. You are different now, and unless someone has
gone through what you are going through, they will not understand, plain
and simple.
It took me many years and many attempts at an understanding from
my family and friends to realise that I am alone in this and will not get the
support I need from people I know. And the faster you can recognise that
you should not blame other people for not understanding you, the better you
will re-integrate with them. After all, if you have chosen to stay in society
and continue being a part of it, it does not matter what your truth is if others
do not understand you. You will need to learn to blend in, to "fake it until
you make it."
It is okay to lie sometimes in this regard if the truth is complicated for
others to comprehend, and you know it will not make a difference if you
attempt to explain your new reality. It is essential not to despair, though. We
are programmed to seek counsel from other people when we are in a
difficult situation, but in reality, we have all the answers within us if we
know where to look. You can overcome all the obstacles and challenges if
you have faith in yourself, the Universe, and the Kundalini transformation
process. Keep in mind that since this Kundalini science is still relatively
unknown to the public, most people presently won't understand you. If and
when knowledge of the Kundalini becomes a part of the mainstream, you
will be able to get more support from the outside world.
You will have many sleepless nights for the first few years after a full
and sustained Kundalini awakening. Therefore, whatever you have planned
for the morning will often have to wait or be postponed. If it cannot be
delayed, you will need to learn to make good excuses for not being 100%
after a sleepless night. Kundalini is often most active at nighttime,
especially when you are in REM sleep. Here is when your consciousness is
on autopilot, allowing the Kundalini to do what it intends.

Because of its intensity, you will not be able to induce sleep often,
especially since this entire process will be relatively foreign to you. Most
often, the fear of what is going to happen next prevents you from relaxing
so you can fall asleep. The faster that you accept these challenges as a new
part of your life, the better off you will be in the long run. I wish I could tell
you that these challenges will not confront you, but I would be lying.
In a spontaneous awakening, it is almost certain that you will fear the
process to some extent, which will affect your sleep. In my case, I was
diagnosed with insomnia a year after the Kundalini awakening. Sometimes
getting a professional diagnosis helps in having the proper excuse for
missing obligations in the morning, such as classes in school or work. Of
course, my condition was a temporary one, and I knew this, but I felt some
sense of comfort in having a valid excuse for my symptoms.
Over time, I found ways to get optimal rest without inducing sleep,
which helped me much while dealing with this sleeplessness issue. I have
discovered that if you lie on your back and consciously observe the
processes of the Kundalini energy moving through your body, you can rest
your physical body enough to be less sluggish the next day. This method
helped me rest my body, although I could not find a solution to resting my
mind.
It will be almost impossible to avoid mental and emotional exhaustion
by not inducing sleep, so you will have to learn to function while you are in
that Lucid mind-state. Sadly, there is no choice in the matter. I will say,
though, that if there is a will, there is a way. If you choose to remain
inspired, even in the face of adversity, you will prevail. And if you decide
not to, it doesn't matter how strenuous your challenge is, you will fail.
Hence, adopt a winner's attitude right from the start, and you will benefit
greatly on this journey.
My first book contains the Spiritual practice of Ceremonial Magick
and the various exercises that I used on my journey to help me deal with the
initial negative state of mind brought on by the awakened Kundalini energy.
These ritual exercises are presented as part of Spiritual Alchemy programs,
the same ones that I underwent many years ago when I was faced with these
same challenges. They are meant to shed the Karmic energy of the lower
Chakras so that you can eradicate all fear and anxiety in your system and
ascend higher in consciousness. I have found that while the ritual

techniques worked to cleanse the Chakras, they also allowed me to get
better sleep and overcome my insomnia.
Right from the beginning of my Ceremonial Magick journey, I began
to feel calmer and more balanced while achieving some level of control
over mental states. And this effect was cumulative, I found; as I kept
working with this Spiritual practice daily, I became more centred and
grounded, which positively affected my sleep. The banishing ritual
exercises that one is given right at the beginning of their Ceremonial
Magick journey aid in clearing the Aura of unbalanced energy, which
allows for more peace of mind. And when the mind is at peace, you can fall
asleep easier.
Other than helping me sleep, these ritual techniques gave me a tool to
combat the many mental and emotional challenges I was undergoing. They
cleansed my Chakras over time and allowed me to stay inspired while this
Kundalini transformation process was unfolding. Before I found
Ceremonial Magick, I was feeling very helpless. Once I discovered
Ceremonial Magick, though, there was no turning back. Finally, I had the
tool I was seeking to develop myself into a Spiritual Warrior and succeed
on this journey.
I practised this sacred art of energy invocation for five years, every
day. These Magickal exercises grounded me, expanded my imagination and
intuition, and most importantly, removed fear and anxiety from my Aura.
They enhanced my willpower and compassion while strengthening my
intellect and purifying my emotions. I was amazed by how well these ritual
techniques worked and how they complemented what the Kundalini energy
was trying to achieve. For this reason, I chose to share these ritual
techniques and more in my first book to give other people in the same
position that I was in the tools they need to help themselves and advance
further on their Spiritual journey.

Aligning With the Body of Light
Once you have cleansed and tuned your lower four Chakras and
mastered the Elements of Earth, Water, Fire, and Air, your consciousness
can elevate and localise in the higher three Chakras of the Spirit Element,
from where it will operate onwards. This shift in consciousness indicates a
new experience of living in the world, unhampered by fear and anxiety.

Your new vehicle of consciousness, the Spiritual Body, is your gift and
reward for all the Spiritual Alchemy work you have put in up to this point.
In most cases, many years will have to pass before the Karmic energy in the
lower Chakras is overcome, especially if you had a spontaneous Kundalini
awakening. For me, it was precisely seven years after my awakening that I
fully aligned my consciousness with the Spiritual Body. Once this occurred,
further Spiritual transformations ensued.
Since all the petals of the Thousand Petalled Lotus of Sahasrara were
finally open for me, the entirety of my primary brain centres also became
awakened. My Pineal and Pituitary Glands, the Thalamus, and the
Hypothalamus were optimised to synchronise my body with the expanded
consciousness, now in overdrive. I finally established the correct flow of
Spirit energy upwards and back down again through the Crown.
The next step in the transformation process was consciousness fully
aligning with the Spiritual Body. Once it was complete, further
developments in my Mind's Eye occurred, awakening the ability to leave
my body and see myself in the third-person.
In the past, I had random moments where I could step outside of my
body, but these experiences were generally short-lived. I could not sustain
this Out-of-Body Experience since my Ego was too active, keeping my
consciousness confined to my physical body. Now, I could focus on any
external object, and if I concentrated on it for more than a minute or so, my
consciousness left my body as I became One with it. Sahasrara Chakra was
involved in this phenomenon but also my Palm and Foot Chakras. It felt
like the Spirit energy just got sucked out of my body through my head and
limbs.
This new development in my Mind's Eye strengthened my connection
to the outside world in a new way. Different sounds started to take shape in
my head as animated images. Each sound had an associated visual
component that came and went in waves, energised before me by some
higher power of imagination.
A deep silence pervaded my mind as if I walked on clouds with my
feet on the ground. Some of these manifestations began developing years
before, but I could not fully attune to these higher powers because I was
still at the mercy of my fear and anxiety. I had to clear all fear and anxiety
to give the Kundalini energy a clear pathway for these higher faculties to
awaken.

I believe this process of unlocking particular abilities is Universal for
everyone. There is a systematic way in which the Kundalini transformation
unfolds over time. As God-the Creator gave all humans a five-star physical
body pattern with the same facial features, I believe we were also given the
same energy components and potential. Jesus Christ referred to this when
he said we are all the same and we are all One. It might take some time for
Kundalini awakened individuals to unlock the same abilities as I did, but
eventually, they will all get there. Everyone is on different timelines
concerning their Spiritual Evolution process, but the endgame is the same.
Once you align your consciousness with the Spiritual Body, you will
bypass your mind, allowing your Being to partake in the Spiritual Realm,
the realm of Non-Duality. This realm is highly mystical and transcendental,
as you will experience. For example, the mere act of listening to music will
create rapture in your heart, unlike anything you have ever felt before. It
will feel like the song is playing just for you, and you are the star of an epic
Hollywood movie, which is your life. Even if your life is ordinary at this
point, you will feel like you can become anything as you are in this state of
perpetual inspiration.
The physical body will start to become partially numb to sensations as
well. This phenomenon results from the Kundalini transforming into fine
Spirit energy, which expands the system while circulating inside you. As a
result, the primary energy channels of Ida, Pingala and Sushumna become
fully open and work in synchronicity with one another.
The Spiritual Body is established as the primary carrier and regulator
of consciousness, although you might still need to do more work on the
lower Subtle Bodies. Ultimately, consciousness needs to rise entirely above
the lower Subtle Bodies, which requires complete purification of Karmic
energy present in those areas. Once this is accomplished, the individual will
altogether rise above their Wheel of Karma.
As you are going through the different transformations in mind, body,
and Soul, I advise you to trust the process instead of fearing it. Although
many years are needed to observe this transformation process taking place
within you before you can finally let go and have faith that you are in good
hands, knowing ahead of time that you are safe is half the battle. In any
event, you don't have a choice but to surrender to this process, so the faster
you can do so, you will only benefit yourself.

To fear is to fail since fear is the fuel of the Ego, which it uses to bind
you to itself and prevent you from moving ahead on your journey. The Ego
wants you to fear the process as it knows it can use this fear against you,
allowing it to hold onto its identity a bit longer. It knows that for you to
transform into a Spiritual Being of Light fully, it will have to be eradicated,
which it tries to avoid at all cost. As mentioned, you can never destroy the
Ego while living in the physical body, but you can reduce it to a small
fragment of consciousness, one that is under the complete control of the
Higher Self.
Instead of spending time worrying and over-analysing the Kundalini
transformation process; instead, you should spend time grounding yourself
and learning how to relax. The Kundalini energy wants to help you
Spiritually evolve, not to hurt you in any way. The internal pain you are
experiencing is generated by the Ego; to overcome it, you must learn to
negate its thoughts. You must relax and have faith that you will be okay as
the Kundalini is working through you.
Some of the manifestations I am talking about here occur in the later
stages of the Kundalini transformation process. It is essential to recognise
that the Kundalini process continues to unfold for the rest of your life after
the initial awakening. Though the first few years can be challenging while
the purification is taking place, once it is complete, other gifts and
phenomena can and will continue to manifest since the journey is ongoing.

BODILY CHANGES AND DIET
Once you have fully awakened the Kundalini and risen it to the Crown,
it will remain permanently in your brain now, which is an exciting time
indeed. For the rest of your life, the food and water you bring into your
body will be the primary factors that sustain the newly expanded energy
system, ensuring that everything is running smoothly.
Food transforms/sublimates into Pranic/Light energy, while water
supports and moderates the consciousness. This Light energy will increase
inside of you and power the Kundalini circuit, which funnels out of the
Bindu Chakra. Although you may not presently understand how these
components come together, you will in due time when this part of the
process unveils to you.
You will experience fluctuations in your appetite also during the
Kundalini transformation process. For example, you might feel a need to eat
more for a little while, followed by a need to eat less. Many periods in my
journey prompted me to eat a lot, so I ate substantial meals multiple times
per day. Once I felt this natural desire to eat more, it signalled me that my
system was in overdrive to sublimate food into Light energy. I generally
welcomed this change, although the people in my life would wonder why I
was putting on weight rapidly and not caring about how much I was eating.
My friends and family always found it strange that I fluctuated in
weight as I would often lose or gain up to ten pounds per week. I usually
lied concerning this situation since when I told the truth, many people
thought I was making excuses for not caring about how I looked, while
others thought I was simply crazy. People thinking I was crazy throughout
my life was a challenge I had to overcome and find my way around.
Also, be mindful of new desires to eat things you have never eaten
before. For example, you may be a vegetarian or vegan your whole life and
suddenly develop an interest in eating meat. Or perhaps the converse
occurs, and if you have been a meat-eater your entire life, you may develop
the desire to be a vegetarian or vegan. Listen to what your body is
communicating to you in this regard since it may know something that you
are consciously unaware of.
The meat gives your body the necessary protein that the body needs to
repair muscles and make hormones and enzymes. Protein is a significant

energy source for the body that is crucial in advancing your Kundalini
transformation. Sometimes, however, if the animal was pre-killed in a
gruesome fashion, as is the case with many slaughterhouses, the fear energy
of the dying animal gets embedded in the meat, further aggravating your
already fragile system. Again, respect your body's desires because your
Soul communicates to you through the body at a deeper level.
Keep in mind that these desires to try new things often don't last long
since their larger purpose is to expand your mind to other possibilities in
life. I highly recommend eating organic food as much as possible since it
will filter better through your body as it contains more Pranic/Light energy
that your body needs to continue your transformation. I believe that
genetically modified foods expose you to DNA degradation, which causes
cancer and other bodily ailments plaguing much of the modern world. And
when you are shopping for meat, try to eat kosher or halal meat where the
animal was killed respectfully, and the meat should be free of negative
energy.
When it comes to water, it is time to stop drinking tap water altogether
unless it comes from a clean water source such as a stream. Most tap water,
especially in big cities, contains many contaminates that are harmful to your
mind, body, and Soul. Either begin drinking quality bottled water or, better
yet, invest in a water filtration system that filters harmful metals such as
fluoride, which is known to calcify your Pineal Gland.
Keep in mind that as the Kundalini is working through you, especially
in the early stages, your kidneys will be working overtime, making them
hotter than usual. The kidneys work with the Adrenal Glands, which will
also be in overdrive since their function is to produce and release hormones
in response to stress. As a result, the Adrenals are often the first to
experience exhaustion in the initial stages. Getting filtered water without
contaminants into your body will soothe your kidneys and Adrenals and
help overcome this exhaustion phase of the Kundalini transformation.

Developing Allergies
As you go through this transformation process and your appetite
changes almost daily, you may also develop new food sensitivities and
allergies, so be mindful of this. For example, I never had an allergy in my
life. But then, nine years into the awakening, I developed an allergy to
almonds, bananas, and rapini, all within two years. And I’m not talking

about mild sensitivities. I’m talking about full-blown allergic reactions
which hospitalized me every time.
I have eaten and loved bananas my entire life. It was my favourite fruit
which I ate almost daily. In fact, it was one of the only fruits I ate. Then one
day, out of the blue, I had an allergic reaction to it which sent me to the
hospital. Since then, if I have a trace of banana in anything, I react
immediately. So clearly, this developed over time, and I believe it is linked
to the Kundalini transformation process.
For some reason, the body rejects particular energies from certain
foods, resulting in an allergic reaction. As a result, my face swelled up with
hives and welts, and my eyes became watery as my body began shutting
down. I was unable to breathe at one point, and I had to call an ambulance
which gave me a high dose of an anti-histamine medication through an IV.
Regular over-the-counter anti-histamines will not work in these instances, I
tried. At the very least, you will need an Epipen or an emergency visit to the
hospital.
Perhaps the allergic reaction happens because of this correlation
between Kundalini awakening and histamine release in the body. This
higher level of histamine gets released once the Light Body is integrated
and fully awakened, which gives one the sensation that there is a shot of
novocaine in the body. The entire physical body feels partially numb, which
becomes a permanent part of everyday existence afterwards. I do not know
precisely why allergic reactions occur. Still, I can only imagine that the
Kundalini energy cannot integrate whatever energy is released from the
ingested food, which acts on the physical body, making it go into disarray.
Whatever it is, I am mentioning it here so that if and when it does happen to
you, you will know why and what it is and that you must get help
immediately.

The Essential Nutrients For Transformation
As I have been going through the transformation process, I noticed that
sweets have a particular effect on the Kundalini energy. Every time I eat
something with sugar in it, I find that my Ego gets amplified, and my
thoughts speed up and become uncontrollable, negatively affecting my
composure. Therefore, when I am going through a difficult time mentally
and emotionally, it becomes a hindrance to ingest sweets, so I try to stay
away from them as much as possible.

Protein is essential as you are transforming from the inside, therefore
eat meats and plenty of fish. Your body requires zinc while undergoing this
process, and fish has plenty of zinc. The Kundalini works like a battery. It
has a positive and negative current expressed through the Pingala and Ida
channels, the masculine and feminine energies. They carry bioelectric
current, which is regulated by your sexual energy. These channels need a
medium to work through; otherwise, they burn out the system. This
something is the fluid of the Kundalini system, which is regulated by zinc.
Your body also needs zinc to make proteins and DNA, especially when
undergoing a genetic transfiguration like in the beginning phases of the
Kundalini transformation. Zinc is also required for histamine storage. The
body produces high levels of histamine when your consciousness is being
localized in the Spiritual Body.
Zinc is directly related to your sexual energy, which I will discuss later
on. Therefore, bringing zinc into the body is of paramount importance.
Since your body doesn't store excess zinc, you must obtain it from your
diet. I recommend doing so without over-the-counter supplements since
they do not synthesize zinc in the body as food does. Fish, as well as
pumpkin seeds, contain a lot of zinc. If you start using supplements, you
create too much of this liquid-like energy unnaturally, which impedes your
ability to focus, thus bringing your mind out of balance.
Your willpower component, which the Pingala Nadi regulates, will be
drowned in this liquid energy which contains zinc. Compared to a battery,
the battery acid, which is regulated by zinc, will drown out the opposing
charges from the electrical current, and the battery will not work correctly.
If you get your zinc from food, it synthesizes most optimally, which you
will be able to feel. Zinc works with the water in the system to regulate
your consciousness. Remember, the Ida Nadi adds the Water Element to
your system, which governs your emotions.

Physical Exercise and Illness
While undergoing the Kundalini transformation, it is advisable to
implement regular physical exercise into your life like Yoga (Asanas),
jogging, weightlifting, competitive sports, swimming, biking, dancing, etc.
As your heart rate increases during exercise, more blood flows into the
brain, bringing oxygen and necessary nutrients. Exercise also helps release
beneficial proteins in the brain that keep the neurons healthy, promoting the

growth of new neurons. Remember, while the awakened Kundalini energy
is transforming your nervous system, your brain works overtime to build
new neural pathways to accommodate these inner changes. Therefore,
regular exercise expedites this process.
On an energetic level, physical exercise is essential because it helps
you synthesize the inner changes, grounding them into the Physical Plane
so that your mind and body can function as one unit. Conversely, if you
only work on healing your inner energies while negating your body, you
will be sluggish physically, adversely affecting your mental state.
Physical exercise for at least one hour per day has also been shown to
lower and reduce the stress hormone cortisol while releasing dopamine,
serotonin, and endorphins in your brain. Thus, exercising cleanses your
brain of unwanted chemicals while elevating your mood and motivation
level, which can be highly beneficial in the early stages after awakening
Kundalini. And with an increase in serotonin levels, which converts to
melatonin at night, you will have an easier time falling asleep. In addition,
competitive sports are an excellent outlet to blow off steam and regulate the
effect of the Fire energy on your mind, especially in males in whom the Fire
Element is more dominant.
An awakened Kundalini strengthens your immune system, allowing
you to overcome illnesses quicker than the average person. However, if you
are ill from the cold, flu, or other common ailments, be mindful not to
overdo it with over-the-counter medication. Since your psychic sensitivity
will be higher than average after an awakening, even the smallest changes
in your body's chemistry can have a powerful effect mentally and
emotionally.
Finally, if you suffer from headaches, which is common in the initial
phase of adjusting to the new energy inside you, take Advil or Ibuprofen. I
find that Advil stimulates the Ida Nadi, soothing the consciousness and
relieving the headache much better than Tylenol, for example. In fact, to
this day, I am not against taking an occasional Advil when needed, while I
try to stay away from absolutely all other over-the-counter medications.

THE NEED FOR DISCRETION
As you may have figured out by now, a Kundalini awakening is a
mysterious, elusive phenomenon that is not a part of the mainstream. Many
people recognize the word "Kundalini" from Kundalini Yoga, thinking it is
a type of Yoga, nothing more. And ones who know about its power to
transform a human Spiritually are often in the dark about some of its more
fantastic manifestations that rare individuals like myself have been
privileged to experience. And as you are reading about these Spiritual gifts
that unfold in the later stages, I realize how difficult it must be to grasp
these relatively abstract concepts because you have to have these
experiences yourself to understand me truly.
Although the process of Kundalini awakening is Universal, people's
accounts are varied, as you understand by now. In this day and age, most
people had partial awakenings, limiting them in the scope of side effects
and Spiritual gifts. The people who had the full awakening, though, are
generally challenged by the same issues. But in the sea of people's accounts,
full awakenings are scarce. Typically, when someone has a full awakening,
they write a book or set of books describing their experiences, enabling
advanced individuals like myself to ascertain where we are in this limited
but growing field of Kundalini science.
On a collective level, society is not up to par with the Kundalini
experience since not enough people have had it for it to be included as part
of general knowledge. Sadly, this means that medical personnel trained to
help us heal mentally, emotionally, or physically will be of no use to us
when undergoing a Kundalini transformation. Therefore, as you go on with
your journey, the rule of thumb you will learn to be true is that unless
someone has had the awakening themselves, and at the level that you did,
they will not understand what you are going through. Thus, the faster you
can accept this fact, the smoother your journey will be.
That being said, I advise you to learn to keep the truth to yourself
about what you are going through. I know this isn't easy because other than
needing advice at times from other people you usually rely on, you also
want the world to understand what you are going through. So my advice
seems counter-intuitive to some extent since we are all there to help each
other, but you will realize there is no choice in the matter. Most people in

your situation, myself included, have had to learn this eventually, or they
deal with a lifetime of being ostracized, being called crazy, having
unsuccessful romantic relationships, losing friends, and even becoming
distant from family members.
This is a solitary journey for the most part, and since it is such a rare
experience, you might meet a few people in person in the city or town that
you are in who will understand you. You will find many people over social
media if you know where to look, but not in person.
You need to learn to hide the truth about what you are going through
from your family, friends and even strangers if you choose to blend in and
continue being a regular part of society. I am not someone who will ever
propagate lying, being an Aquarius hell-bent on always speaking the truth,
but in this particular case, you will learn you don't have much choice in the
matter. If you don't take my advice and tell people about your experience,
you will soon experience everything I am warning you about, which may
make you feel generally alienated from others, resulting in further
loneliness and depression. People are afraid of what they don't understand,
and they shun it from their existence if they have a choice. And in this
respect, they do have a choice, and even the best of people, the most
compassionate ones, will end up judging you because they very simply
don't understand you. Please don't blame them; accept this fact.
Also, and this part is essential: you don't have to explain yourself to
people. It is not your duty to do so. There is nothing shameful about your
reality, and you need to protect yourself and others from what is happening
to you. People who have not gone through what you are going through now
cannot assist you. Putting your life into their hands will be catastrophic for
your Spiritual journey as these people will unknowingly lead you astray
every time. Also, a big part of the Kundalini awakening process is
becoming your teacher and guide. I have said this before, and I meant it: all
the answers to your problems are within you if you ask the right questions
and have faith in yourself. Instead of turning to someone else for solutions,
including someone like me with a lot of knowledge and experience, you
need to learn to get in touch with your Higher Self and turn to them instead.
No one can compensate for your Higher Self; they are the only intelligence
that can give you the right advice every time.
I chose to blend in with others and keep trying to lead a normal life as
I was going through the Kundalini transformation process. As such, I had to

learn to tell lies when others inquired about the issues I was undergoing. It
does not hurt anyone not to know the truth concerning this matter,
especially when you know ahead of time that these people can't help you.
Telling them the truth and making them sceptical about your sanity will
only harm you since now you will have to deal with setting them straight on
top of helping yourself.
Many strange symptoms will surface in your life as you are
undergoing the Kundalini transformation process. In almost all cases, these
symptoms will be temporary, although they may last for many years.
Sleepless nights, emotional ups and downs, erratic behaviour, inability to
focus, fluctuation in weight, and excessive and uncontrollable sex drive are
just a few examples that may come about on your journey. If you decide
you don't want to be judged by other people, you must mask these issues.
Telling others that your symptoms result from undergoing a Kundalini
awakening will undoubtedly make people think you are losing a grip on
reality, making them lose faith in you as a person. They often believe that
you are trying to make up an excuse they can't understand to confuse them,
typical for someone at the onset of mental disease.
Your best way to navigate around circumstances is to lie in this matter.
Permit yourself to do so since nobody will accept your excuses for not
meeting expectations, such as getting to work or school on time, being there
for someone mentally or emotionally, or fulfilling your daily tasks. Your
situation falls outside the societal norm; therefore, it is critical to tell a lie to
protect yourself. Even if you are not comfortable with the idea, you will
find that lying about what is happening will make this process easier on
you, and you may still be granted second chances to prove your worth to
others. If you do not, you will keep hitting a brick wall with people and
situations in your life.
The idea of lying is to take something too fantastic to believe and
replace it with something an average person would understand. For
sleepless nights, you can say you have bouts of insomnia, which is why you
are not 100% in the morning. For emotional ups and downs, you can blame
it on something going on in your life. Get creative but make your excuse
something that an average person will understand and can sympathize with.
Remember, you have to be your therapist and doctor and find solutions
to your problems. If you want to share with people who will understand
you, get their perspective, and ask for advice, find them on social media

instead. Hundreds of groups and pages have gathered Kundalini awakened
individuals that have gone through what you are going through and can
assist you. Many of them are on there for that reason, and they are thrilled
to help you in any way they can. I have met some fantastic individuals on
social media groups in this way.
I advise you to be critical minded when talking to strangers on social
media, though. Some claim they have had a Kundalini awakening, but in
reality, they might not have even if they genuinely believe their claims.
Many Spiritual phenomena nowadays are being classified as Kundalini
awakenings. And then there are hundreds of people who had a partial
awakening and think they have all the answers. These people are the most
difficult ones to spot and potentially the most harmful. So it helps to have
some level of discernment in this matter and inquire about other people's
experiences before taking their advice since there is no faster way to be led
astray than to put your faith in the wrong person.
I see all kinds of good and wrong advice in social media groups, and I
could spend an entire day addressing and clarifying each post. And I did
this many years ago and have aided over two dozen people by giving them
the right advice at the right time and helping them along their journey of
awakening. Some contact me to this day to thank me for being there for
them when they needed me. Through social media groups, I realized that
my knowledge and experience in this matter could be of great assistance,
crystallizing my purpose over time. So I went from writing articles and
making videos on the Kundalini to eventually reaching out to the broader
public with books such as the one you are reading.

The Folly of Prescription Medication
As you are undergoing the Kundalini transformation process and your
mind is in disarray, you may often exhibit strange behaviour to which other
people around you will react. Naturally, the people I am referring to are the
ones closest to you, including family, friends, and colleagues. After
witnessing your erratic behaviour, they may call you crazy or insane, which
will confuse you even more about your state. After all, you will be
undergoing tremendous emotional and mental pain, which you don't
understand and which you seemingly won't have any control over.
At your weakest moments, your family or friends may suggest that you
see a psychiatrist or therapist of some kind and talk to them about your

problems. After all, these licensed personnel are trained to help people who
are undergoing similar symptoms.
However, the problem is that these therapists have usually never even
heard of the Kundalini, let alone have had an awakening themselves. And
how can a doctor diagnose you about something that the medical field
doesn't even recognize? You are not crazy, and you do not have any real
reasons to be depressed. Also, if all of your emotional and mental problems
began after awakening Kundalini, isn't it clear that the Kundalini is the
cause behind the effect and not something external?
Regardless, many awakened individuals do follow that route, and they
see a psychiatrist or therapist. After all, we are conditioned to listen to one
another and accept advice on life issues, especially when we are desperate
for answers to our problems. And, as you understand by now, undergoing a
Kundalini transformation after a full and sustained awakening will bring on
some of the most significant challenges yet.
From talking to many people in the same position as me many years
ago, seeing a psychiatrist always yields the same results. The psychiatrist
listens to your problems, but since they don't know what you are talking
about when you mention the Kundalini, they usually do the first thing when
coming across a person with mental or emotional problems—they prescribe
medication.
For the symptoms that a Kundalini awakening brings on, these
medications are either anti-psychotics or anti-depressants. The nature of
anti-psychotics is to block neural impulses that carry information from the
subconscious to the conscious mind. They shut down what is happening on
the inside so that it may appear that you are feeling better on the surface
since you are will not hear negative thoughts anymore. On the other hand,
the anti-depressants usually boost your serotonin and dopamine levels to
create a fabricated feeling of being happy and joyful. Sadly, being
prescribed any type of prescription medication by a medical doctor is the
wrong approach to managing a Kundalini awakening.
Even though you may be exhibiting symptoms akin to chronic
depression, bipolar, or schizophrenia, these states are temporary and need to
be worked through by the Soul. They result from the influx of Light
brought on by the Kundalini, whose purpose is to eradicate any negative
energy present in your Chakras. Therefore, overcoming these emotional and
mental challenges is the necessary step in advancing Spiritually.

Having awakened the entire Tree of Life, you will have access to parts
of Self that have been hidden from you until your awakening. The
Kundalini Light bridges your conscious and subconscious minds allowing
many of your traumas and neurosis to emerge.
If you block out subconscious activity from the consciousness, these
emotional and mental issues will be left at bay, unprocessed. Over time, this
harmful unconscious content will build up, creating even more
psychological problems, which will persist until the individual gets off the
medication. If the individual chooses to continue being on medication, they
may develop a lifetime dependency on the drug since getting off may prove
more challenging. Sadly, the moment they began taking prescription
medication, they inadvertently put their Spiritual Evolution on pause, and it
will remain as such until they stop taking it.
While on medication, the Kundalini energy cannot do what it intends
to, which is to continue the process of inner transformation. "Out of sight,
out of mind" may temporarily diffuse problems, but it will not solve them.
In fact, it will create even more future issues. Mainly, prescription
medication is designed to develop a dependence on the drug itself since the
individual never learns to deal with their problems naturally. They do not
create neural pathways that enable them to find solutions to problems and
cure their negative states; instead, they rely on the drug as a crutch that does
it for them.
Kundalini energy is biological, and it needs the human faculties to
work through. If some external drug shuts down the channels of
information transmission, then you will put on the Kundalini process of
cleansing hold. Once the individual gets off the drug, the Kundalini energy
will be stirred into activity again. The same process will occur, this time
coming on even stronger and more uncontrollably.
You have to understand that the Kundalini process will not give you
more challenges than your Soul can handle. Your Soul is the one that chose
to have this experience in the first place and the one that put it into motion.
The Ego experiences pain, fear, and anxiety since it is the Ego that has to be
transformed in this process. Instead of turning to prescription medication,
which is the Ego's way out so that it can protect its identity, you will be
doing a service to your Soul to find another way to deal with your mental
and emotional problems. Your Spiritual Evolution is the only thing that

matters in this lifetime. No terrible thought or emotion, no matter how scary
it may appear, will harm you physically.
The Kundalini awakening process needs to be approached with the
fortitude of mind, strength, and courage. Fear and anxiety are temporary,
and if you persist through the process, you will inevitably emerge on the
other side as a transformed person. It may take many years, but dawn
always follows the night. All one has to do is get through the night.

CREATIVITY AND MENTAL HEALTH
Spiritual reality is an invisible science measured and quantified by
intuition, emotions, and intellect. But most of what comprises the Spiritual
reality cannot ever be proven, which is why we have a division in our
society between believers and non-believers. The non-believers are
primarily people who only rely on science, which relies on proof. But to
take away faith into something greater than yourself and put your hands in
science alone is just robbing yourself of the juice, the nectar of tasting the
Spiritual life. Seeing is believing, but conversely, believing is also seeing. If
you can believe in something that other people believe in, then it will
manifest in your life in due time. Such is the Law.
We know much about the science of tangible reality, the world of
Matter, but understand very little about invisible realities. So instead of
pondering the age-old question of who or what God is, let's focus on
humanity and the Spiritual gifts some of us are given that make us seem
God-like in the eyes of other people. And the most precious gift our Creator
gave us is the ability to create. But where does creativity come from, and
why do some people have more of it at their disposal than others?
Gopi Krishna and other awakened individuals have said that all human
creativity is a by-product of Kundalini activity in the body, implying that
everyone's Kundalini is active to some degree. This may sound like a
radical statement to some people, but I believe this to be true as well. I also
think that the Kundalini influences unawakened people subliminally. These
people are consciously unaware of their creative process and cannot tap into
the source of their creativity like the awakened can.
One of the purposes of the full Kundalini awakening is to raise and
evolve the consciousness to a higher degree so that you can become
consciously attuned to your energy system's functioning, including the
creative process, instead of it being something happening in the background
affecting only your subconscious.
Also, this part is essential; the Kundalini has not pierced the Three
Granthis in most unawakened people, which means that their creative
energy is limited, as are the Chakras through which this energy can express.
The average person has active Kundalini, but since they have not overcome
Brahma Granthi, they can only express their creative energy through

Muladhara Chakra. As such, they are bound to their Ego, primarily seeking
physical pleasures, which causes unhealthy attachments and fears. A person
in this position will never reach their optimal creative potential, nor will
they significantly impact society. Sadly, with humanity's low level of
evolution in today's day and age, most people are in this state.
The more willful and ambitious types have generally overcome this
first Granthi and have enabled the expression of their creative energy
through Swadhisthana and Manipura Chakras. Still, they are bound by the
Vishnu Granthi, which lies directly above, preventing the Kundalini from
reaching the Heart Chakra, Anahata, which will awaken the unconditional
love energy within them. Therefore, they may use their creative energy to
satisfy their ambitions, but they may lack a higher vision to truly make
them stand out from the rest of the people.
And then we have the savants of our society, the prodigies and
visionaries who have pierced Vishnu Granthi, allowing them to use even
more of their creative potential. Their Kundalini may be operating from the
higher Chakras enabling them to perform incredible feats and access
information and abilities that other humans don't have. However, even they
are limited by dualistic thinking resulting from an untied Rudra Granthi
between Ajna and Sahasrara Chakras. As such, we cannot compare their
creative potential with someone who has pierced all Three Granthis and has
fully awakened their Kundalini, unleashing unlimited creative potential.
The genius of scientists such as Newton, Tesla, and Einstein, and
philosophers like Pythagoras, Aristotle, and Plato may well be attributed to
the workings of the Kundalini in their Light Bodies. Similarly, the talent of
musicians like Mozart, Beethoven, Michael Jackson, and artists like
Michelangelo, da Vinci, and Van Gogh could be the working of the
Kundalini energy at a subconscious level. And let us not forget the athletic
abilities, skills, and will to win of athletes like Muhammad Ali and Michael
Jordan. These people were so legendary that we still revere them as Godlike figures, and their tales of greatness will live on forever.
A few of these great men and women describe having the means and
methods of tapping into the source of their creativity, and they were well
aware that they were channelling some higher form of intelligence when
they were in these inspired states. However, they were not aware of the
existence of Kundalini, nor did they report something like it working

through them. So all we can do is speculate based on what we saw in these
people and the work they left behind.
These influential figures had something special: a connection with the
Divine that gave them particular insights, powers, and skills that people
around them didn't have. Many of them were so ahead of their time that
they changed the course of human history. But we will never know whether
it was the Kundalini that was directly responsible for their greatness or it
was something else.

Kundalini and Mental Health
If Kundalini is active in everyone to a greater or lesser degree,
significantly impacting the psyche, it is no wonder that no major progress
has been made in mental health. The Kundalini is not even recognized as a
real thing in the medical field. Apart from developing medication that can
turn on and off certain parts of the brain which receive impulses from
invisible forces in the energy system, the current scientific understanding of
mental health is rudimentary at best. To truly understand how the mind
works, the mental health field needs to have a proper foundation laid in the
invisible science of the human energy system to develop cures that treat
more than just symptoms.
I have always been fascinated as I watched the inner workings of my
mind while undergoing the Kundalini awakening process. Some days I
would have such an emotional high, which was often followed by a
profound low, all in a matter of minutes. These emotional ups and downs
did not happen to me before the awakening. My emotions became so highly
charged by the Kundalini energy that if my mind was working in a positive
direction and thinking happy thoughts, those emotions became enhanced,
and I was more content than ever. If my mind was thinking in a negative
direction, though, and I was thinking sad or unhappy thoughts, then my
emotions would get so low that I would feel downright depressed. And it
made no sense why my depression was so intense when just a minute before
I was incredibly happy, and there was no apparent change in my state other
than what I was thinking about.
This incredible shifting between happy and sad states I attributed to the
workings of my mind and the quality of my thoughts. For this reason, at the
beginning of my Kundalini awakening process, when I had very little
control over my mind and what I thought about, I was having these

emotional episodes. These episodes can be compared to someone diagnosed
with bipolar mental disease, although I found it was to a lesser degree than
the episodes I heard some bipolar people have.
What separates the two cases is that I have always known the
difference between right and wrong and would not act on my emotional
impulses. At the same time, some people allow these inner psychological
workings to run their life and take over their mind, body, and Soul. The key
is to recognize the situation for what it is and not blow it out of proportion.
One must understand emotions as something tangible, something which can
be moulded and changed with the application of the mind. Knowing this
difference, you must work on controlling your thoughts since it is the
"chicken that came before the egg" scenario and not the other way around.
You must be a cause instead of an effect and readily shape and mould your
mental reality with willpower.
What is a disease in this respect but a dis-ease—something which is
making you feel uncomfortable and uneasy? Physical illness is usually a
result of some foreign material entering your physical body and causing a
change or deterioration at a cellular level. Does this idea of a foreign body
coming into you also apply to mental health, or is it something within you
that causes mental and emotional issues? To answer this correctly, we need
to look at what thoughts are and if they are inside of us only or can they be
something outside of us, which makes its way into our Aura, to experience
them.
The Kybalion, which elucidates the Seven Principles of Creation, says
that we are all communicating telepathically and that our inner "Me", the
creative component that generates images impressed by our "I" component,
is always working and cannot be turned off. Therefore, the challenge is
using your willpower, your "I," to continually give impressions to your
"Me" component. If you get mentally lazy and do not use your willpower
like God-the Creator intended you to, then other people's "I's" will give
your "Me" component its impressions. However, and this is the pitfall: you
will believe they are your thoughts and will react as such.
These thought senders are all around us, and some of them are the
thoughts of other people, and some are Spiritual entities outside the
physical realm, which take part in our Inner World and can impact our
minds. These Angelic and Demonic Beings influence our thoughts,
especially if we don't use our willpower to its fullest capacity. In the case of

Demonic Beings, their influence can result in full-body possessions if you
listen to them and do their bidding.
These complete takeovers of your mind by hostile foreign forces are
very real indeed. Conversely, receiving communication from Angelic
Beings may result in complete Spiritual rapture and bliss. In the case of
empaths or telepaths, they are open to the influence of Spiritual entities
more so than the average human as they are continually receiving vibratory
impulses from the outside world. Someone with an awakened Kundalini
falls into this category; it is very challenging to differentiate between your
own thoughts and thoughts of someone or something outside of you.
The key, in any case, is to understand the Inner World of the Mental
Plane of thoughts as something that is not particular to only you and that
throughout the day, many thought vibrations will enter your Aura from the
outside world. We are all a part of this hub, this "thought world," and we are
continually inducing the invisible world with our thoughts, affecting other
people subconsciously. Thoughts have energy; they have mass and are
quantifiable. Loving, positive thoughts are higher in degree in the vibratory
scale than are negative, fearful thoughts. Loving, positive thoughts keep the
Universe in motion, while negative, fearful thoughts contribute to keeping
humanity at a low level of Spiritual evolution.
A war between the Angelic and Demonic Beings has been waged for
as long as humanity has existed. It is an invisible war on the Astral Plane
and Mental Planes, where human beings serve as the conduits of these
invisible forces. Currently, given our low level of Spiritual evolution, it is
safe to say that Demonic Beings are winning the war. However, according
to religious scriptures from all over the world, it is the destiny of humanity
to eventually usher into the Golden Age, meaning that Angelic Beings will
win this war for good.
Schizophrenic patients are those people who have higher than average
receptivity to the invisible world, but what separates them from psychics
(who are either telepaths, empaths, or both) is that people with
schizophrenia cannot tell the difference between their thoughts and thoughts
outside of them. In many cases, they are under the control of Demonic
entities who have established a foothold in their Aura by feeding off their
fear energy.
Demonic entities, which are intelligent Beings, the source of which is
unknown, look for weak-minded people that they can feed on. Once they

find a person susceptible to their influence, they will take over their minds
and bodies, which over time extinguishes the Light from their Souls so that
they become vehicles for these Demonic forces, nothing more. They
become husks or shells of their former selves. Although the Soul can never
truly be extinguished, once the separation happens in the mind, it becomes
almost foreign to the individual who lost their connection with it. It is still
there to be tapped into again, but it takes a lot of mental effort and Spiritual
work to regain that connection.

Strengthening the Willpower
In the first few years after awakening Kundalini, my willpower was
tested often concerning my decision-making process. Whenever I became
convinced of an idea, I could, within seconds, be persuaded that the
opposite is true. For a long time, it was challenging to make decisions
because I was aware that I was negating the validity of its counterpart by
following any course of action. I knew and understood that any idea could
be a good idea given enough proof in the direction of that idea. But for most
ideas, there is also enough proof that their opposition is correct as well.
This process went on for many years until I had attained a stronger
connection to my willpower. To achieve that, though, required an immense
amount of mental work and effort on my part. By gaining a correct link
with my willpower, I also aligned with my Soul unprecedentedly. Working
with the Fire Element and Manipura Chakra via Ceremonial Magick ritual
exercises helped me achieve this.
If you do not have a firm connection to your willpower, which is your
Soul's expression, then you will fall prey to the duality of the mind and
impulses of the Ego. I have seen this time and time again in Kundalini
awakened individuals, and it is one of the most significant challenges they
face.
The awakening activates all the Chakras so that they are all
functioning simultaneously. As the conscious and subconscious minds
become bridged, the result is a high level of emotional charge since the
activity in the Mental Plane is amplified. For this reason, many Kundalini
awakened individuals are so emotionally sensitive and changeable with
their decision making. Since their receptivity to outside vibrations
heightens, they need to learn to differentiate between their thoughts and
those entering their Aura from the environment. One of the ways to mitigate

this occurrence is to connect with the Soul and strengthen the willpower,
enabling discernment and discretion.
Once you learn to make a decision, the other challenge is to commit
yourself to it and follow through. Doing so transforms you into a person
whose word can be trusted and not someone who allows their changeable
emotions to lead the way. Building up your Soul by developing virtues and
overcoming vices will make you a person of honour that others will respect.
Although there are various Spiritual Alchemy practices you can use to
optimise your inner functions, many of which are included in this book,
Ceremonial Magick was the answer for me. Its ritual exercises enabled me
to boost my intuition, willpower, memory, imagination, emotions, logic and
reason, etc. By invoking the Elements through Magickal means, I could
optimise my inner functions by attuning the Chakras. These internal
components of Self are weak in the first place because of Karmic energy
stored in the Chakras pertaining to each function. For example, if your
intuition is weak, then you may need to work on Ajna Chakra. Conversely,
if your willpower is weak, so is Manipura Chakra since the Fire Element is
responsible for its expression. And so on.

Kundalini and Creativity
There is a definite correlation between being happy and inspired and
exhibiting high creative abilities. When one is experiencing positive
emotions, the inner drive to create becomes amplified. It manifests as an
inner longing, a passion or desire to create something beautiful. This
relationship between creativity and inspiration is symbiotic. You cannot be
creative without being inspired, and to get inspired, you need to be creative
in finding a new and exciting way to look at life.
If you get stuck in your old way of thinking, relating to the Ego instead
of the Soul and Spirit, both your inspiration and creativity will suffer. There
needs to be a constant renewal of your mental and emotional reality that can
be achieved once you live in the present moment, the Now. As you draw
energy from this infinite field of potentiality, your state of Being will be
inspired, opening up your creative abilities.
My creativity became infinitely expanded in the seventh year after
awakening the Kundalini in 2004. I experienced a complete opening of the
Lotus Petals of Sahasrara Chakra, which allowed me to enter the Now and
function through intuition. I noticed a strong correlation between

overcoming the duality of my mind, strengthening my Willpower, and
enhancing my creative abilities. Once I obtained a permanent link with my
Soul, I became perpetually inspired, overcoming my fear and anxiety and
tapping into my creative source. In this incredibly high state of inspiration, I
felt a need, a yearning, to express this newfound creativity somehow. As
such, my journey of creative expression through multiple mediums began.
My first expression was through visual art since it was something I
was good at my entire life. I found that this high inspired state just flowed
through my hands as I painted, and I was developing techniques that I
seemingly pulled down from the Aethyrs. I started painting in the abstract
style and would channel colours, shapes and images that vibrated and
danced in my Mind's Eye as this process was unfolding. I realized that the
true source of creativity is from the Soul, but it is channelled through Ajna
Chakra via Sahasrara.
When I was expressing creativity in this enhanced way, all of my
higher components were turned on and functioning simultaneously. I
readily received impulses from the Higher Self and the Crown Chakra,
which combined with the Fires of my Soul to channel through the Mind's
Eye. The creative process seemed to take over my mind and body like I was
possessed. I found that while in this state, time would fly in an
unprecedented fashion as many hours would pass in the blink of an eye.
What I noticed is that my inner creativity was able to recognize and
replicate beauty. Here is the key, I believe, because when I am in an
inspired state, which is now a permanent state of Being for me, I see beauty
all around me and recognize it in everything. The energy of unconditional
love, which is the foundation of inspiration, creativity, and beauty,
transposes everything I see with my eyes. Therefore, if I engage in a
creative act, I can channel something beautiful by using my body as a
vehicle.
Beauty has a form that I believe can be quantified. It is well balanced
and harmonious. It is colourful if it wants to be experienced as joy. There is
texture to it and often a mixture of Archetypes that convey vital ideas to the
Soul. We can express emotions through beautiful works, and naturally, all
creative expressions are meant to move you emotionally in some way.
If beauty wants to be seen as sorrowful, there may be a lack of colour
and more serene shapes used to express it. If it wants to be seen as
melancholy, colours respective to this feeling are used, such as shades of

blue. This process of channelling beauty is not limited by visual arts alone
but can be seen everywhere. For example, we can express sorrow through
song and melody. This correlation implies that colours, as well as musical
notes, express states of consciousness. It accounts for the feeling behind the
music as well as visual art and sculpture.
All the colours we find in nature come from the visible spectrum of
Light. The visible spectrum is the part of the electromagnetic field that is
visible to the human eyes. Electromagnetic radiation in this wavelength
range is called visible Light or merely, Light. This fact implies that all
musical notes on the music scale also relate to Light energy. Now you can
see why your creative potential becomes infinitely expanded once you
awaken the Kundalini and receive an influx of Light into your Aura.
I experimented with creative expressions for many years and found
myself able to channel new ones with ease. I explored singing and music
and expressed my creativity through the written word in poetry and inspired
writing. However, I have learned the importance of balancing creativity
with logic and reason. You cannot just create haphazardly, but it has to have
a structure, an intellectual foundation somehow. I learned that beauty has
form and function, and it is this marriage between the two that needs to be
followed when creating; otherwise, your creative expressions will miss the
mark.

SAHASRARA AND THE DUALITY OF
THE MIND
For maximum alignment with the willpower and the Fire Element of
the Soul after a full Kundalini awakening, the Thousand Petalled Lotus of
Sahasrara needs to be fully opened. However, in the scenario where it is a
partial opening of Sahasrara, as a result of not allowing the Kundalini to
complete its mission upon the initial rising, it can result in energy blockages
in the head. In this case, Ida and Pingala Nadis will continue being
influenced by Karmic energy in the Chakras below Vishuddhi, the Throat
Chakra, instead of being liberated and free-flowing in the Body of Light as is
the case when the Lotus unfolds entirely.
When Rudra Granthi is pierced, the Kundalini has to rise with full force
to Sahasrara, allowing the top part of the Sushumna channel that connects
the middle of the brain to the Crown to widen and transmit enough energy to
open Sahasrara's Petals. Sahasrara's flower head is closed in unawakened
people; when Kundalini rises, it begins to open in the same fashion as
watching a time-lapse of a flower in bloom. Each petal opens to receive the
Light coming in from the Soul Star and Stellar Gateway Chakras above
(Figure 153). If some of Sahasrara's Petals remain closed, the Crown will not
be fully activated, resulting in blockages accumulating in the head area over
time.
Once the Kundalini rises from Muladhara, it seeks to leave out of the
body through the Crown, resulting in Sahasrara's Petals unfolding like a
flower, ready to receive the Light. Sahasrara is named the "Thousand
Petalled Lotus" because there are theoretically a thousand Petals, each
connected with countless minor Nadis or energy channels that carry Pranic
energy from different areas of the Body of Light that terminate in the head
area. There are hundreds, potentially even thousands, of these nerve endings
in the brain. Each one is like the branch of a tree that carries Pranic energy
in, through, and around the brain. As you open the Crown fully, it allows
many of these Nadis to reach outward to the surface of the top part of the
head. It often feels like bugs crawling on your scalp or energy zaps or
twitches as these brain Nadis are being infused with Light.

As discussed, once you awaken the primary six Chakras below the
Crown, different parts of the brain unlock, as do the Minor Chakras in the
head that correspond with the primary Chakras. The entire psychic energy
system serves to channel Light energy throughout your Body of Light, which
allows your consciousness to experience transcendence while embodying the
physical body. Once the Crown Lotus fully opens, the Soul exits out of the
body, allowing the consciousness to reach the Transpersonal Self in the
Chakras above the Crown.

Figure 153: Sahasrara Chakra's Lotus

The minor Nadis serve as psychic receptors powered by the Light
inside the body, which is built up through food intake. This Light in the body
works with the Light brought in from Sahasrara Chakra. As mentioned
before, the Body of Light is like a tree whose roots are in the ground while
the torso serves as the tree's trunk. The trunk carries the primary Chakras
while the body's limbs serve as major branches of the tree. These branches
carry Light energy through their Seventy-Two Thousand Nadis, which
extend out to the skin's surface, although on a subtle level. The ThousandPetalled Lotus releases the individual consciousness from the body,
connecting it with the Cosmic Consciousness in Sahasrara.
Sahasrara is at the top, centre of the head and acts as a portal through
which White Light is brought into the energy system. This Light is filtered
through the Chakras below. However, if some of the Lotus petals remain
unopened due to blockages in the primary Chakras and Nadis, the flow of
the Kundalini becomes obstructed, resulting in mental and emotional
problems (Figure 154). Therefore, the Kundalini needs an unobstructed flow
from Muladhara, through Sahasrara, and beyond to the Transpersonal
Chakras above.

Figure 154: Kundalini Flow through Sushumna
You can alleviate psychological issues with the use of Spiritual
practices, like Ceremonial Magick, which cleanse and remove blockages in
the Chakras and Nadis. The reason why Ceremonial Magick is the most
potent Spiritual practice that I have come across is that it most effectively
allows you to invoke the energies of each of the Five Elements to tune their
corresponding Chakras. In turn, the Nadis that connect with the Chakras are
purified, including Ida, Pingala, and Sushumna, whose flow is optimised. If
any blockages at the initial Kundalini rising hampered the energy reaching
and opening the Sahasrara Lotus completely, you would also eliminate these
blockages. Once out of the system, the Kundalini will naturally rise again to
finish the job by unifying Shiva and Shakti at the Crown Chakra, Sahasrara.

Introvert vs. Extrovert
If some of the Lotus Petals are closed, it is a sign that energy is
stagnating and moving improperly in the head. This issue can cause pressure
in the head and even headaches. Too much Light in the head causes a person
to become inverted, focusing on their inner thoughts, especially at the back
of the head where the subconscious mind operates from. Remember, your
mind-state is dependent on where you focus your attention in the many
levels or layers of consciousness.
Introverts use logic and reason via the Lower Mental Plane when
cerebral or the Astral Plane when experiencing emotions. Introverts are
affected by the Light of the Moon, which gives many illusions. This Lunar
Light is the source of duality since it is only a reflection of the Light of the
Sun, which is a singularity.
Extroverts use the Light of the Sun and are action-oriented, unlike
introverts who are more known for their thinking and feeling. Extroverts
don't spend much time in their heads; instead, they operate from their hearts
which is more instinctual. They express themselves through verbal
communication, allowing their actions to lead the way. Most extroverts draw
their energy from their environment and the people around them. As such,
they like big crowds and being the centre of attention.
Conversely, introverts like being alone or with a few friends they trust.
They draw their energy from within themselves, so their thoughts and

emotions are so crucial to them. They are methodical in their approach to life
and don't use words as anchors like extroverts do but express themselves
through their body language instead.
On the surface, it may seem that extroverts are more confident, but this
isn't always the case. Because introverts use their mind more, they are more
careful in their decision-making process, making more logical conclusions
that provide fruitful results. Extroverts generally bypass the mind and make
decisions with their gut. If their intuition guides them, their choices can be
beneficial, while when their instincts lead them, they often suffer. When
willpower is dominant, extroverts operate from the Higher Mental Plane,
while when they are channelling their intuition, they are influenced by the
Spiritual Plane. Extroverts are generally led by their Soul, while introverts
are more prone to being led by their Egos.
The Kundalini awakening is meant to make you more of an extrovert,
although you will invariably fluctuate between both states throughout your
Spiritual journey. For example, you will spend more time being an introvert
in the beginning stages when the Ego is more active, while in the later
stages, when you fully attune to your Soul and Higher Self, you will become
an extrovert. This is because the Spiritual path always begins in the mind but
ends in the heart.
Your alternation between introverted and extroverted states during your
Kundalini awakening process depends on what Elements you are working
with naturally via the Kundalini fire or through ritual invocation techniques.
The Water Element relates to your emotions, which can be voluntary or
involuntary, like instinctual emotions—as such, working with this Element
will make you introverted. The Fire Element relates to your willpower which
motions your body to act, thus making you an extrovert. The Fire Element is
expressive of Archetypes and truth, being tempered by the Light of the Sun.
Conversely, the Water Element demonstrates the duality of the mind, acted
on by the Lunar Light.
The Air Element (thoughts) vibrates between them, fueling them both
and giving them their dynamism. Thoughts can be conscious, motioning the
willpower, or subconscious, acting on the feelings. And finally, the Earth
Element, related to physical activity and being in the present moment, makes
one an extrovert. The density of the Earth Element prevents too much
thinking or feeling, which only leaves us with action. The Earth Element is

directly related to the Soul and being led by one's inner impulses, whether
intuition or instincts.

Emotions vs. Reason
A powerful dichotomy that presents itself in the fully Kundalini
awakened individual is the constant battle between the emotions and the
intellect, expressing itself through logic and reason. Emotions (feelings) are
a result of our past conditioning as well as our inner desires. Some feelings
are instinctual and involuntary, while others we have control over.
Logic is the systematic study of arguments, whereas reason applies
logic to understand or judge something. These two inner components are two
sides of the same coin. They represent the part of us that can perceive the
truth of the matter and make judgements concerning our decision-making.
Reason can predict outcomes; it acts like a super-computer that reads the
reality around us. It then gives us informed calculations enabling us to
perform the most optimal action possible, which will yield the best results.
Emotions are impulses that drive us to take action at the moment. They
are influenced either by self-love or unconditional love for all humanity.
When controlled by self-love, emotions are not concerned with results but
with feeling good and getting what the Ego wants when they want it.
Emotions are thus linked with personal desires. When influenced by
unconditional love, the Soul is exalted, and the focus is on building virtues
and the pleasure one gets from being a good person.
Lower emotions are expressed through the Water Element along the
Astral Plane of reality. The higher emotions rise as high as the Spiritual
Plane, however. Logic and reason are always influenced by the Fire Element
acting on the Air Element, along the Mental Plane. It cannot project higher
than the Mental Plane.
The Ego and the Soul can take over both emotions and reason.
However, the Soul always operates via the energy of unconditional love
acted on by the Spirit and Fire Elements. The Soul understands that we are
Eternal and our spark will continue past physical death, so it seeks unity and
recognition of oneness with other human beings. It does not act out of selflove; only the Ego does since the Ego lives out of the mind where it
recognizes the duality of Self and other Selves. It guards and protects the
body, fearing its eventual death. This fear energy is what drives much of the
emotions that the Ego influences.

Sometimes our emotions can tell us something so firmly, which goes
entirely against what our reason tells us, and vice versa. This process will go
on for many years in the Kundalini awakened individuals. However, at the
higher points of the Kundalini awakening, you will overcome personal,
lower emotions, and your reason and logic will align with the Soul and
Higher Self, the Spirit. It is impossible to succeed in life while only
following your feelings since they can be so volatile, and acting on them
often yields very negative results. Emotions that are an expression of some
inner desire have no logical basis for the most part. By acting on them, we
often get ourselves into trouble.
But even though we like to do what feels good, as is our natural
impulse, through the Kundalini awakening process, you learn to curb the
lower emotions since your Ego is in the process of dying. As a result, you
can look ahead and perform actions that align with higher emotions that
project through the lens of unconditional love. Often you will find that these
higher emotions are also aligned with the logical part of you, and this
balance between the two will yield the most favourable results in your life.
The balance between higher emotions and reason is, in fact, the proper
foundation necessary to live a happy, successful life. Over time, you will
build up your character and a degree of fortitude, which was unfathomable at
the beginning of your Kundalini awakening journey. You will learn to live
with an emphasis on proper conduct and action coming from a place of
morals and ethics. This mode of living is the natural expression of the Fire of
the Kundalini and the feeling of the Glory of God, which permeates your
Heart Chakra, Anahata.

KUNDALINI AND FOOD TRANSFORMATION
Gopi Krishna became renowned in the late 1960s as one of the
foremost authorities on the Kundalini awakening phenomenon in the
Western world. Although Arthur Avalon's The Serpent Power, published in
1919, was the first book to introduce the concept of the Kundalini to the
West, Gopi wrote a series of books focusing entirely on the Kundalini,
which got translated into English for the Western world. This happened
around the same time as Yogi Bhajan introduced his brand of Kundalini
Yoga into the United States. Between the work of these two men, the entire
world became familiarized with the word "Kundalini."
Gopi wrote many books on the Kundalini for the next twenty years.
While his work was more philosophical, Yogi Bhajan taught the practical
methods through Yoga to activate this elusive and mysterious energy within
his students. However, the Kundalini science has not advanced much
beyond the work of these two men. The one notable figure that came along
and had a significant contribution in this field is Swami Satyananda
Saraswati, who wrote many books on Tantra and Yoga and elucidated the
practices to follow their paths while providing the means and methods of
how to awaken your Kundalini. The work of Swami Satyananda has
significantly influenced my contribution to Tantra and Yoga in this book.
And I would be remiss if I didn't mention David Frawley's extensive work
on Yoga and Ayurveda, which has been of tremendous service to the
Western world and me personally.
I have already talked about Gopi's initial Kundalini awakening and his
peril after having an incomplete rising. This situation tormented him until
he found a solution. His despair resulted from the Ida channel remaining
dormant while Sushumna and Pingala activated when his Kundalini
awakened. It manifested as debilitating anxiety that made life impossible
for Gopi, some days wishing he was dead. However, this situation requires
further examination since it is a common occurrence that could happen to
anyone. For example, I have dealt with the same problem, although in a
different context and have found solutions to fix it. Having a clearer picture
of the mechanics of what happened to Gopi will enable you to use my
solutions to fix this issue if it happens to you too.

After Gopi's Kundalini awakening, since Ida's cooling, passive, Water
energy was not present, the hot, active, Fire energy of Pingala was working
overtime. However, this situation only made matters worse for him. The Ida
channel activates the Parasympathetic Nervous System, which calms down
the body and mind. In contrast, the Pingala channel starts up the
Sympathetic Nervous System, putting the body and mind into "fight or
flight" mode. Imagine having the SNS system on permanently and being
unable to turn it off. Consequently, I've been in this exact situation, so I
know what that is like and how to fix it. The only difference is that I already
had the tools to overcome it by the time that happened to me, which Gopi
did not have.
If this happens to you, and it can happen even during later stages of the
Kundalini transformation, every moment of your life becomes a state of
crisis. The worst part, I have found, is bringing food into the body, which
creates the most agonizing fire that feels like it is burning you alive from
the inside. I lost ten pounds in the first week when dealing with this
situation, and Gopi also mentioned rapid weight loss. You see, the hot,
intense Pingala channel needs to be balanced by the cooling energy of Ida;
otherwise, the system goes into disarray, negatively affecting the mind.
Every morsel of food you take in manifests as debilitating stress and
anxiety, which exerts and exhausts your Adrenals Glands. This state of
mind can take a toll on your life, feeling like it is a life-or-death situation
that no one around you can help you with. Imagine the despair you go
through and the state of emergency while being the only one that can help
yourself. I have been there.
The moment you ingest food, it begins to transform into Pranic energy,
which powers the Pingala channel and kicks it into high gear since the high
quantity of Prana is not being evenly distributed through both primary
Nadis. Gopi knew from Tantric and Yogic teachings that he most likely
didn't awaken Ida, so he knew what to focus on to try and help himself. He
knew that only Ida contained the cooling power he needed to balance his
energy system. And me, well, my help was Gopi, who went through the
same thing and wrote about it in his books that I had read up to that point.
Gopi made every effort to activate Ida through meditation. The
meditation he used was the visualization of a Lotus flower in his Mind's
Eye. By holding its image over time, the Ida channel finally activated at the
base of his spine and rose upwards into his brain. He felt its cooling,

soothing energy, which balanced out his energy system. His mind became
well regulated now. He found solace in food intake and even began to eat in
excess, focusing mainly on oranges, probably to replenish his worn-out
Adrenal Glands.
Visual thoughts, which are pictures in the mind, are the effect of the
Ida channel, not Pingala. So it is not a coincidence that Gopi Krishna
activated Ida by forcing himself to form a visual picture in his Mind's Eye
and hold that image with a mighty concentration.
It is essential to understand that if a Kundalini activation and rising is
to be successful, all three channels of Ida, Pingala, and Sushumna must rise
into the brain simultaneously. To create a well-balanced psychic system and
complete the Kundalini circuit in the newly developed Body of Light, Ida
and Pingala must rise into the centre of the head at the Thalamus and blow
open Ajna Chakra. Then, they continue moving towards the point between
the eyebrows, the Mind's Eye centre. If you have awakened Ida and Pingala
channels, but they have become blocked, or one or both has a short-circuit
sometime in the future, you can correct the flow of these Nadis again by
focusing on the Third Eye.
If Ida and Pingala drop below the Seventh Eye Chakra or the Bindu
point at the back of the head, the Kundalini circuit will cease to function. To
restart it, you have to meditate on the Mind's Eye and hold an image using
your imagination and Willpower. This practice will re-stimulate Ida and
Pingala and reopen the Seventh Eye and the Bindu Chakra. As such, the
Nadis will realign and reconnect the entire Kundalini circuit in the Body of
Light. Another meditation that may work if there are blockages in the Bindu
is to hold your attention one centimetre away from the Bindu point until the
energy is realigned and flowing correctly. Likewise, by focusing one
centimetre away from the Seventh Eye Chakra, you can also align that
point.
I will get into these exercises and meditations in more detail in the
chapter titled "Kundalini Troubleshooting" towards the back of the book.
These meditations are paramount to stabilizing your Kundalini system. I
have discovered all of these meditations myself in the past seventeen years,
and as such, you will be seeing them for the first time in this book. If there
were mass Kundalini awakenings and the whole world needed guidance and
quickly, my meditations would be the answer to many energy-related issues
that people could experience. So how did I think of them?

When I underwent problems with the Kundalini circuit, I would lay on
my bed for hours, days, even weeks, looking for different energy "trigger"
points in the head area to meditate on that could remove energy blockages
and realign the Nadis. Sometimes you even need an Ajna or Sahasrara
Chakra re-activation, although it is impossible for these centres to close
once the Kundalini energy has awakened them fully. During this discovery
process, I was determined to find solutions at all costs that allowed me to
prevail. "If there is a will, there is a way," I always said, and "any problem
has a solution," even if it's a problem of an energetic nature. I never
accepted failure in this regard so that through my discovery process, I
would find solutions that I could one day share with the world as I am now.
My discoveries have been tried and tested many times in my life when
Kundalini system issues challenged me. And all of them work. Understand
that the Kundalini is very delicate but also very volatile. Many things we do
as humans which are readily accepted as the norm in society can and will
short-circuit the Kundalini system. For example, how we treat each other as
people, traumatic moments, and even the use of drugs and alcohol can be
very detrimental to your Kundalini system. Once you finish this book, you
will have the keys to overcoming any issues with the Kundalini system and
not be at its mercy when it malfunctions.

Food Sublimation/Transformation
The process of food sublimation/transformation yields many different
experiences as time goes on. For example, after activating the Body of
Light upon the initial Kundalini awakening, you will feel a sense of inertia
and lethargy for some time afterwards since the body uses all of the Pranic
energy it gets from food to build up the Kundalini circuit. As a result, you
may feel uninspired and unmotivated to perform your daily tasks. You may
also want to isolate yourself from other people and be alone. Keep in mind
that these rather uncomfortable manifestations are not permanent. As you
evolve, they will pass.
After the initial awakening, you will most likely find yourself in a
negative mindset mentally and emotionally as you are nourishing your
Body of Light through food intake. Your dopamine and serotonin levels will
drop since the body is in overdrive to synthesize food into Pranic Light
energy. It takes a few months for the energy to stabilize and for you to feel
some sense of life purpose again. During this transformation process, your

motivation and drive, as well as your willpower, will enter hibernation
mode. You will have to give yourself a break and take some time off from
whatever you plan to work on and accomplish during this period. However,
I can guarantee that you will re-emerge from this experience stronger and
more invigorated than ever.
During the initial parts of the build-up process, the Kundalini Fire gets
sublimated into Spirit or Light energy. At first, it is in a state of potential as
latent heat. However, as you bring food into the system, it feeds the fire and
makes it grow. As it grows, it intensifies, which begins to feel like you are
burning up from the inside. Finally, at the peak point of the heat’s intensity,
as the heart races and anxiety is at an all-time high, the fire starts
sublimating and becomes Spirit energy.
The most important thing to understand from this process is that the
Kundalini Fire will be in a continuous state of transformation and
transmutation. It changes form as you keep eating and drinking water to
regulate and cool off its effects. I would often find myself running to the
kitchen to get a glass of water to cool off. My parents would watch in
disbelief, trying to figure out if their son had turned into a drug addict
because my behaviour was alarming. At other times, I would need a glass of
milk if the heat was too intense and my body lacked nutrients. So, I suggest
that you be ready with that glass of water or milk whenever you need it and
have a good excuse for your strange behaviour if you don’t live alone.
This process is very intense for a few weeks to a few months at most.
Afterwards, it stabilizes and become smoother. The beginning part of the
awakening is genuinely the most challenging since the fire inside you feels
like it is burning you alive, and due to its intensity, your stress and anxiety
go through the roof. Part of the fear you experience is the Ego trying to
figure out what is happening but cannot since it normally functions by
predicting things based on what it has already seen, and it has never seen
something like this before.
This sublimated Kundalini Fire, which I can only describe as a
cooling, Mercurial Spirit, is meant to fuel the Kundalini circuit. While the
Kundalini begins as a raging fire, remember that this state is only one of its
temporary forms. Knowing this ahead of time can save you a lot of
heartaches, so don’t forget what I said. Over time, and with food intake, the
Kundalini Fire transforms into a peaceful, ethereal, liquid Spirit energy that

soothes you and washes away the negativity the system encountered
previously.
Being patient as this process occurs inside of you is half the battle.
Remember, nothing remains static while the Kundalini is transforming you;
metamorphosis is a process of constant change. Therefore, you must learn
to welcome the inner changes instead of fighting them. For this reason,
many awakened individuals advocate surrendering to the Kundalini energy
at all costs. Now you can see why it is easier said than done. However, you
will see that you have no choice in the end.
Although the raging fire can be very uncomfortable at its peak stages,
it will inevitably become a cooling Spirit energy. Whether you choose to be
an active or passive participant in the process is totally up to you. I cannot
tell you how long it will take to transform since the timing varies from
person to person, but I advise eating nutritious food and being calm, patient,
and relaxed as much as possible.
Invoking negative thoughts and doubt will only stimulate fear in the
system, which will cause an adverse effect. Being calm while the raging fire
of the Kundalini is acting will release serotonin and oxytocin, allowing the
sublimation into fine Spirit energy to occur. Dopamine and adrenaline
hinder this process; the body must activate the Parasympathetic Nervous
System instead of the Sympathetic one.
It helps to place the tongue on the palette of the mouth while this
process is occurring. This act will connect the Ida and Pingala Nadis and
make it easier to keep the mind calm and sublimate the energy. As the
raging fire transforms into Spirit, new pockets of energy open up in the
central abdomen area and on its right side. Here is where this new Spirit
energy seems to begin its ascent upward along the Ida and Pingala channels
in the front of the body. These pockets of energy, located in front of the
kidneys, create the feeling of Oneness, Eternity, and complete absorption
into the Spirit.

Thoughts in "Real-Time"
After a full and sustained Kundalini awakening, Light energy will
continuously be present inside the brain. Since the Light serves to bridge
the conscious and subconscious minds, it has a particular effect on your
thoughts. While in this unusual state of Being, your thoughts will begin to
appear very real to you. Like whatever you think of is present there with

you in real life. This phenomenon is partly a result of the Kundalini
piercing Anahata, the Heart Chakra, on its upward rise, awakening the
Silent Observer aspect of the Self.
This part of the Self, combined with the tenuous Light inside your
head, will give you the feeling that all thoughts in your mind are real and
not merely just ideas. As you think, the Silent Observer part of the Self
watches this process take place in the Heart Chakra like an innocent
bystander. But, conversely, once this part of the Self is awakened, so is its
opposite—True Will. It is the generator of all reality, the Higher or GodSelf.
Experiencing your thoughts as real is, in fact, the catalyst behind the
fear and anxiety that presents itself right after a complete and permanent
Kundalini awakening. As deep, subconscious thoughts are united with
conscious thoughts, everything interior appears more real than ever. It can
be a terrifying and confusing experience at first, as it was for me and many
others going through the same thing. It becomes difficult to tell the
difference between your conscious thoughts and the projected fears from
your subconscious.
This new "realness" of thought is the source of the elated feelings of
happiness from inspired thinking, including the intense depression resulting
from negative, fear-based thoughts or ideas. Both Angelic and Demonic
forces can now permeate your mind, and the challenge becomes being able
to tell the difference between the two. Adverse thought senders can either
be your hidden skeletons in the closet, thoughts being projected from other
people's minds or even outside entities that live in the Astral and Mental
Planes.
After awakening Kundalini, your next step in the process of Spiritual
evolution is to master these two Planes, especially the Mental Plane, since
what you think about will determine the quality of your reality. In New
Thought Philosophy, this is expounded upon by the Law of Attraction,
which states that you bring positive or negative experiences into your life
by focusing on positive or negative thoughts. The Kybalion supports this
theory, as the Law of Attraction is based on the core Hermetic Principle of
Creation which states that "The All is Mind, the Universe is Mental." This
implies that your thoughts are directly responsible for your experience of
life since the difference between the World of Matter and your own Mental
reality is just a matter of degree. Therefore, Matter is not as real and

concrete as we perceive it to be but is the Thought of God, which works
with your thoughts to manifest your reality. Hence, we are Co-Creators with
our Creator through the mind, through thoughts.
The Hermetic Principle of Correspondence, "As Above, So Below,"
tells us that the higher Planes affect the lower ones, explaining why the
Mental Plane affects the Physical Plane. This axiom is also regarded as the
basis of practising Magick. Aleister Crowley defined Magick as "the
science and art of causing change to occur in conformity with Will." Even
though our thoughts determine reality, we need to get in touch with and
tune into the willpower that powers our thoughts. The process of
manifestation into the physical reality has at its source the impulse of the
True Will from the Spiritual Plane, which becomes a thought in the Mental
Plane, triggering an emotional response in the Astral or Emotional Plane,
and finally manifesting in the Physical Plane of Matter.
For this reason, working with the Elements and purifying each Chakra
is of paramount importance on the Spiritual journey. The subconscious
mind is no longer something deep and hidden inside the Self; it becomes
something right there in front of you every waking moment of the day,
whose function you can observe. The reason for this is because Ajna
Chakra is now awakened and operating at optimum capacity after receiving
an influx of Light energy through the awakened Kundalini. The Mind's Eye
is the "tool" we use for introspection and seeing into the workings of the
subconscious mind.
Remember, Karmic energy (in the sense of referring to negative energy
stored within the Chakras) results from an opposing viewpoint, belief, or
memory that in the case of individual Chakras relates to a particular part of
the Self. The old Self, the Ego, is what we need to purify and consecrate so
that the new Higher Self can take its place. The Self uses different powers
activated by the energies in the Chakras as they are the source of these
powers. At the beginning point of the awakening, the Self will have more
reference to the Ego than ever, but as we purify our concept of the Self, we
are shedding the Ego.
It becomes necessary to cleanse the subconscious mind because, as
stated earlier, you must first master your Demons, the negative aspects of
your psyche, before you can reside in the higher Chakras and be one with
the Spirit Element. By aligning your consciousness with the higher three

Chakras of Vishuddhi, Ajna, and Sahasrara, you are aligning with the True
Will and the Higher Self.
Because you cannot turn off this process, as it has been triggered by
the awakened Kundalini, having the tools to purify the Chakras and master
the Elements will become more relevant to you than anything else at this
time in your life. Otherwise, you will be at the mercy of the psychic forces
within the Cosmic Planes. Therefore, you must develop yourself into a
Spiritual warrior at this point as your mind, body, and Soul are being
remodelled daily by the newly awakened Kundalini energy.

EMPATHY AND TELEPATHY
Once the Kundalini circuit is open, and the Spirit energy is circulating
in the Body of Light, your consciousness gains the ability to leave the
physical body at will. As you funnel out of your physical body through the
Crown Chakra, you experience your Spirit energy pervading everything you
perceive with your physical eyes in the material world. This experience
adds to the real-time perception of reality; only now you can feel and
embody the energy of every object in your environment. Through your
Heart Chakra, you start to feel the essence of whatever you put your
attention on as your Spirit energy transposes onto that which you look at or
hear.
When watching a violent movie, for example, you can feel and
experience the energy of a violent act by transposing your body into the
body of the person you are watching. This process occurs automatically and
instantaneously, without conscious effort. All that is required to make this
phenomenon happen is giving the movie your undivided attention. It is
quite a magical experience at first and one of Kundalini's greatest gifts. It
starts to develop when enough Spirit energy has been sublimated through
the Kundalini Fire and food intake. It can happen by the end of the first year
of the awakening, maybe even earlier.
This transformation and manifestation enables you to attune to other
people's feelings when focusing your attention on them. This process is how
you grow in empathy. You literally step into their body with your Spirit and
can feel what they feel. If you are not giving them attention by looking at
them, all you must do is listen to them as they are talking, and you tune into
their energy through sound. This manifestation occurs through your
connection with sound. It is a form of telepathy—reading people's minds
and the quality of their thoughts.
Empathy is reading people's feelings and the emotional energy of their
hearts. Sufficient Spirit energy needs to pour into your newly developing
Body of Light through food transformation/sublimation to create both
manifestations. It is like a wave that is created, and your attention is the
surfboard. With your attention, you can now surf the wave by focusing on
things external from you.

It would help if you learned to separate yourself from whatever
emotions or thoughts you are experiencing by understanding that it is not
projected from inside but from outside. The Ego can get confused, thinking
it is the Ego from whom these emotions or thoughts are projected, which
can cause fear and anxiety. Once you have gone beyond your Ego and can
separate yourself from what you are experiencing, you can do so without
any negativity. However, this might only occur in the later stages of the
Kundalini transformation, once the Ego is purged and fear and anxiety have
lessened their energetic charge or have left the system entirely.
When you first start to experience this phenomenon, it might be
unclear to differentiate who you are and who other people are. It is one of
the biggest challenges in the first few years of the awakening since so many
emotions and thoughts will be running through your mind and heart that
you will be swayed backwards and forward like a boat in stormy ocean
waters. The key is to stabilize your interior and learn to navigate the
turbulent waters. In this way, you are learning to gain control over your life,
maybe for the first time. The Greek aphorism "Know Thyself" is essential
to implement at this stage in your life. You will need to take hold of your
thoughts and emotions by understanding your energy projections and other
people's.
An important note on both telepathy and empathy—once you develop
a stronger connection with your Spiritual Body, these psychic gifts will
become permanent, meaning you can't turn them off anymore. You cannot
decide that it is just too much to bear and that you simply don't want to take
part in it anymore. Sometimes it can be quite overwhelming since you are at
the same time dealing with your anxiety and fear while also taking on
others'.
It would help if you had introspection at this time. You should take
some time to yourself if you are not used to doing that because you will
need it. If you have been a social butterfly your whole life, you cannot be
around other people all the time anymore. It's time to change these habits
and take time to yourself as well. Alone time is the only way for proper
introspection because some of these thoughts and feelings of other people
will stay with you for days, weeks even. You have to learn to let them go
and not make them a part of who you are.
Over time, once you can differentiate between the two and have
cleansed and purified your Ego, you will be able to spend more time with

others and less time alone. In addition, you will be able to tune into other
people's love energy, which now feeds your energy. Not in a way that you
are a psychic vampire that steals other people's energy but in a way where
you accept love and give it back so you can maintain selfless love energy
exchange with people you interact with. Love energy is nourishment for the
Soul for all of us, and this is why we need each other. To learn to channel
pure love without attachment, you will first need to overcome your
negativity.

ETHICS AND MORALS
Once the Kundalini is active, there comes a significant shift in
consciousness, and you notice that your concept of ethics and morals
through proper behaviour and conduct is developing. In other words, you
begin to act with moral principles in all life situations, naturally. Unity of the
Self and the rest of the world grows, causing you to feel connected to all
things from a moral standpoint. There comes absolute respect towards
humankind as this Kundalini awakening process is occurring.
Over time, the Kundalini begins to eradicate personal memories of the
past, thereby exalting the Higher Self over the Ego. This process allows you
to live in the Now, the present moment, most optimally. It can be a very
confusing state at first because, as explained, the Ego functions by referring
to memories about itself. As memory is fleeting, though, the Ego begins to
drop away through the Kundalini purging process since it can no longer
associate with past events. As such, the Spirit and Soul become exalted.
Naturally, you will start to develop a high ethical standpoint since, in the
present moment, you realize that the right way to conduct yourself is with
respect and honour toward all living things.
This moral upgrade is a natural development for any person undergoing
the Kundalini awakening. It is a gift. All people with awakened Kundalini
are humanitarians and give selflessly in one way or another. They are
seemingly on autopilot in most cases once they have surrendered themselves
to the Kundalini energy. A complete surrender must occur to achieve this
state, and this surrender is inevitable for everyone going through the
transformation process.
No matter how much the Ego holds on, it ultimately knows it will take
a backseat to the Soul and Spirit. Eventually, its hold is lessened. A solid
ethical and moral foundation is the birthright of all Kundalini awakened
people. Our overall destiny as human beings is to love and respect one
another instead of taking advantage. Once you have developed yourself
ethically, you will recognize that we are all brothers and sisters since you
will be nearer to the Mind of the Creator than ever before.
Ethics and morals are connected with unconditional love energy
building up in the Heart Chakra. You begin to feel the whole world in your
heart as One essence (Figure 155), coupled with the desire to channel this

newfound love energy to others. And as you project love energy towards
other people, your character begins to build virtues whose foundation are
ethics and morals.

Figure 155: The Heart Chakra and Oneness

You begin to feel a sense of honour since we are all brothers and sisters
born of the same Creator. When you are in the present moment, in the Now,
you can attune to that part of yourself that is Eternal—the Holy Guardian
Angel. Your Higher Genius begins to teach and guide you on your Spiritual
journey. They teach you how to be a better human being every day of your
life. The Holy Guardian Angel teaches you about the Universe and imparts
knowledge and wisdom daily. It is all-wise and all-good and has the highest
moral compass because it is part of God-the Creator.
Being kind towards others makes it easy to separate the good people
from the bad ones or ones without a moral compass. I find that for the most
part, though, people are good, and when you treat them with love, they
reciprocate. By honouring and respecting them, you channel love towards
them that feels like a Light beam that shoots out of your chest. Once this
beam of Light energy enters the Aura of another human being, they absorb it
and send it back to you through their Heart Chakra. This perpetual love
energy circuit only severs when one of you begins to think with their Ego,
asking what's in it for them. If people of the world didn't have massive Egos,
we would naturally be exchanging love in this fashion, eradicating evil on a
global scale.
I have also found that learning to act through an ethical lens has made
me love and respect myself more. As you recognize the goodness inside you
and choose to share it with others, you invariably learn to love yourself.
After all, other people are just reflections, mirrors of ourselves. We are all
the Creator, and the Creator is One. It is crucial to learn to love yourself
because you overcome your insecurities by doing so. One method of
learning to love yourself is to be comfortable in the Now, which overcomes
your insecurities.
In most cases, some external factor triggers them, making you go
inwards inside your mind. Once you are introverted, and inside yourself, you
lose touch with the Now and the realm of pure potentiality where anything is
possible. By staying in the Now, though, you become extroverted instead,
and as long as you remain present, you won't go inside yourself where you
can access your insecurities.
The Kundalini awakening is meant to make you into a Being of Light,
and as such, this upgrade enables you to live life to your fullest, perhaps for
the first time. To get the most out of life, you need to be in a state where you

can recognize the opportunity in everything you are experiencing to take that
opportunity to experience something new and grow Spiritually. Morals and
ethics go hand in hand with being in the Now. Conversely, being in the Now
relates to the concept talked about by Jesus Christ—the Glory of God.
The Glory of God relates to attuning your consciousness to the realm of
Eternity—the Kingdom of Heaven. You can reach this realm through the
Now, but you must completely surrender yourself through faith to enter it.
Only your intuition can contact the Eternal Kingdom as it requires your Ego
to be silenced to experience it. The Glory of God is an emotional rapture that
comes from experiencing Oneness with all things. It is the Realm of pure
potential and Non-Duality. It may seem far-fetched to think you can resonate
with this concept but believe me; it is attainable. One of the purposes of the
Kundalini transformation is to take you into the Kingdom of Heaven
eventually. Note that although the experience of the Glory of God is usually
momentary for the average person, highly evolved Kundalini awakened
individuals can stay in that state indefinitely.
It is essential to understand that these concepts and ideas mentioned
above are connected. One gives rise to the other, which then awakens
something else. These are natural expressions of becoming a Being of Light
through the Kundalini awakening. It truly is an upgrade and a new way of
living on this Planet. Others may never know what you are experiencing, but
they will see the changes you are undergoing through your actions.
The key is to stay inspired during this transformation process. You must
avoid allowing the occasional negativity inside the mind to bring you down
and make you lose hope. Instead, see it as something temporary that you will
overcome with time. The entire Kundalini transformation process unfolds as
the years go by. One experience leads into the next as everything about you
is continually changing and evolving. It takes many years before you truly
can reap the benefits of being transformed into a Being of Light, but it will
all make sense when you do.

PART VIII:
KUNDALINI AND LUCID DREAMS

THE WORLD OF LUCID DREAMS
Lucid Dreaming in the Inner Worlds is a critical topic of conversation
within Kundalini circles. Kundalini awakenings guarantee the experience of
Lucid Dreaming, which takes place on the Inner, Cosmic Planes. Lucid
Dreaming is a form of Out-of-Body Experience (OBE) which occurs during
sleep while your consciousness is in the Alpha State. The Alpha State is a
dream state where the body is resting, but consciousness is still awake. It is a
state between normal waking consciousness and sleep.
This state is most commonly triggered when you wake up briefly in the
early morning at around six or seven and then go back to sleep after having
already slept for at least five hours so that your physical body is rested. But
when you are undergoing an intense buildup of Astral Light, such as right
after the initial Kundalini awakening, if you have fully activated your Body
of Light, you will find yourself Lucid Dreaming almost every night. This
experience occurs because there is a surplus of Light energy present, which
funnels your consciousness out of Sahasrara Chakra, through the Bindu, to
have this experience.
You can also induce Astral travel while awake, but it is more
challenging to achieve since you have to transcend the physical body
somehow. For this reason, it is usually best to explore Lucid Dreaming
during sleep when you are in an Alpha State and the physical body is already
rested.
A Kundalini awakened person will experience a myriad of Lucid
Dreams, almost nightly, after a permanent awakening. This phenomenon can
go on for many years. During a Lucid Dream, the Kundalini circuit is active,
and the body is fed Astral Light/Spirit energy through food
sublimation/transformation. The terms Astral Light, Spirit, Prana and
Kundalini energy are all interchangeable. The difference is their state, which
is dependent on the level of Spiritual evolution you are at, though they all
originate from the same substance. In essence, Kundalini energy is Light
energy, which transmutes into different states during the Kundalini process
of transformation.
Once you have built up a sufficient amount of Light energy and are in
an Alpha state, your consciousness vaults out of the physical body through

the Crown Chakra, and you enter into one of the Cosmic Planes. As
mentioned so far, these Planes exist in a dimension apart from the Third
Dimension of Space and Time. Now, suppose the experience is an Out of
Body one, and you vaulted out of the Crown Chakra. In that case, you are
most likely entering one of the Spirit Chakras or Transpersonal Chakras
above the Crown and "surfing" their corresponding Plane. Since these Planes
are beyond Space and Time, your consciousness can experience a lifetime of
events in one hour. You will sometimes wake up like you physically
underwent these experiences and will find yourself mentally drained.
As discussed, we each have a body-double made of Light; an elastic
substance called the Body of Light. Lucid Dreaming is a type of "Astral
projection," a term coined by Theosophists in the 19th century. Although
Lucid Dreams happen almost involuntarily, Astral Projection is a fully
consciously induced experience—a Soul projection into one of the
Astral/Inner Planes. In the case of Lucid Dreaming, this projection occurs
spontaneously as the Body of Light vaults out of the physical body during
the Alpha sleep state. It merely leaves the physical body, having you wake
up somewhere else, in some strange and usually never-before-seen land.
In a Lucid Dream, there is no break in consciousness. Your
subconscious and conscious are now working in unison, so the content of
your dreams changes to include things that you often think about
consciously. Your imagination is perpetually active in a Lucid Dream as you
are the experiencer and the experience in one. Very often, you are projected
somewhere that you have never been before with content that you
consciously never thought about. It is most common, though, that when you
have a Lucid Dream, to see elements familiar to the consciousness so that it
would not be too much of a shock to the Self as you are undergoing this
experience.
For this reason, Lucid Dreaming involves your imaginative abilities,
although infinitely expanded. In a Lucid Dream, your Higher Self, your
Soul, is the conductor of the experience. It always chooses where to go and
what to experience. However, you cannot consciously choose your
experience like in an Astral projection. Since we are connected with both our
Ego and our Soul in our waking state, the Lucid Dream experience will seem
foreign to the consciousness to a great extent. The Ego is entirely inactive in
a Lucid Dream since it belongs to the physical body, which is transcended.

Waking Up in a Dream
The most fantastic thing about Lucid Dreams is that the consciousness
experiences a reality outside of the physical one, though it feels authentic.
The first step of every Lucid Dream is your consciousness becoming aware
that it is dreaming. It happens instantly as the consciousness realizes that the
setting is "different" from the Physical World, but its experience is very
much the same.
A popular method of realizing you are dreaming is to train yourself to
look at your hands as soon as you find yourself in a dream. There are no
fixed shapes in dreams, and everything appears fluid and elastic like it is
moving ever so gently. Therefore, the fingers on your hands would be all
shapes and sizes, so when you look at them, you can see them move up and
down ever so slightly. This recognition signals to the brain that you are in a
dream, thereby awakening your consciousness fully.
There is usually a sense of excitement when this happens since a part of
you realizes that you are a conscious creator of your reality now, and you
can experience whatever you desire with the help of your imagination. Since
your Ego is transcended, the Soul takes over the experience, and you find
yourself in a state where you are creating your reality and experiencing it
simultaneously. You have full access to your willpower and can control the
content of your dream. You cannot control the setting, but your Soul can
choose where it wants to go and can use your Body of Light as a vehicle to
get there.
Your experience will be similar to how you experience the physical
reality, the World of Matter. However, the main difference is that you are
limited by Time and Space in the Physical World. For example, you cannot
be in Paris by merely thinking it, but you have the choice to get on a plane
and fly over there. The entire experience, though, will take some time to
complete until you can get to Paris. In a Lucid Dream, you can think of
somewhere you want to be, and you will be there in an instant. There is no
break in consciousness from when you think of where you want to be and
you being projected there the moment you have this thought—it is all one
fluid experience.
The Soul has full knowledge of all the places it can venture to in this
vast Universe of ours, which are as Infinite as God-the Creator. Thus, in a
Lucid Dream, your Soul will automatically project somewhere for you to
experience its environment. However, the following morning, when you

wake up from your experience, your Ego will not be able to figure out how
and why you went there or what it was. After all, the Ego is limited to what
it has seen, and it has only experienced things of the Earth. All the Ego will
know is that the experience was incredible, and you will feel grateful for it.

Developing Abilities in Your Dreams
Once you are projected into a Lucid Dream, you will have complete
control over your Body of Light wherever its setting may take place. Neither
space nor time nor gravity can limit this second vehicle of consciousness.
However, since you are not bound by gravity, one of the first gifts to develop
is flying through the air like Superman (Figure 156). This ability is the most
fun and usually the first one to manifest for everyone. Flying in a Lucid
Dream is the only way to genuinely experience flight without the use of
machines which is exhilarating, to say the least.
The consciousness soon finds itself able to perform other feats which
would be impossible to achieve in physical reality. For example, since the
Body of Light is weightless and is not bound by Matter and gravity, and
since everything in the Astral plane is Holographic without any fixed form,
you will develop the ability to walk or fly through objects. Another ability
that emerges is Astral telekinesis—the ability to levitate objects in the Inner,
Astral Planes and move them with the power of the mind.

Figure 156: Flying Like Superman in a Lucid Dream
To perform telekinesis and move objects in the Physical World with the
mind, you must first learn to use this skill in the Astral world since the two
work on the same principles. I have seen documented video footage of
people who claim they have psychic powers where they move light objects
in a vacuum, although minimally. However, to displace heavier things than a
small piece of paper, let's say, would require an immense amount of mental
energy, which is a feat seemingly impossible and something that we never
documented. I believe that it can be done, though, using the same mental
principles and mind over Matter. However, the person doing it would have to
be such a Spiritually evolved person that they would appear God-like to
others and not merely psychic. Jesus Christ performing miracles in The Holy
Bible is one example of how evolved you would have to be to affect the state
of Matter with your mind.
Other gifts that develop in the Lucid Dream world is the ability to read
people's minds, make yourself as big or small as you want, and generally
fulfil any desire you have in your daily waking life, such as sleeping with a

person of your choice. The Lucid Dream world is a Wonderland for the Soul
and satisfying on all levels of existence. In addition, it does not carry the
Karmic consequences of fulfilling your Soul's desires, no matter what they
are.
After having had these Lucid Dream experiences for many years in my
life, I am left with many doubts concerning the development of Siddhis, the
supernatural abilities mentioned in Hindu scriptures. However, Siddhis are
not exclusive to Hindu sacred texts since psychic powers are displayed in all
religious books, irrespective of their culture or tradition, which leaves us
with the following predicament: perhaps the Prophets, Saints, Yogis, and
other Holy figures from these books were talking about the Lucid Dream
world when they mentioned humanity's ability to gain these extraordinary
powers.
We may never know the answer to this, but in my experience, there is
more proof that what I am proposing is accurate than these powers being
something that we can attain physically. For example, every levitation claim
has been debunked, from the East to the West, and what we think are
displays of psychic powers always end up being some kind of magical
illusion or trickery.
Therefore, it cannot be a coincidence that as I continued to Lucid
Dream in my early years after a Kundalini awakening, I was slowly
developing every one of these psychic abilities that scriptures talk about.
However, no matter how hard I tried to exhibit these powers in physical
reality, they remained exclusive to my dreams, although my Soul
experienced them as real.

Karmic Energy in Dream States
While in the Lucid Dream state, you can also consciously try to find
solutions to problems you might be facing in your life. This experience will
only happen when you have accessed the Spiritual Plane. Its purpose is to
help you master this Plane by accessing Karmic energy particular to one of
the corresponding three Spirit Chakras. The Divine Planes are without
Karma and, as such, are pure joy. Keep in mind that it is your Soul, not your
Ego, that is being trained here; hence, it will seem automatic that you are
projecting into whatever Chakra needs work.
You may not always have the ability to fly in your dream, but you will
still be able to control its content to a large extent and be consciously aware

that you are dreaming. Every experience is fundamentally different in a
Lucid Dream. Once you have begun to have these experiences, your
consciousness becomes trained to awaken in the dream.
For the most part, the heavy Karmic energy in the lower Cosmic Planes
keeps the consciousness asleep and unaware that it is dreaming. Therefore, it
needs to have a few moments when it is not engulfed mentally and
emotionally to realize it is experiencing a dream which prompts the Soul to
take over its content.
Although much of what you will experience is your imagination in
hyperdrive, some of the places you will visit in the Lucid Dream world are
real and not a by-product of your enhanced imagination. Suppose your
consciousness does not wake up while in the dream, which is the first step to
the dream becoming a Lucid one. In that case, everything will continue on
autopilot, and you will continue having a regular dream experience.

Binah and the Astral Blueprint
The Lucid Dream world is very different from the Physical World, yet
similar in how the consciousness experiences it. The Ancients believed that
every city or place on Earth has an Astral-double that can be visited during
sleep while Lucid Dreaming. Where you go depends on where your Soul
wants to take you and is not something that you can control consciously
through the lens of the Ego.
This Astral-double reality goes hand in hand with the Qabalistic
teachings, which state that Malkuth, the Earth, has a Holographic blueprint,
which is in another dimension of reality. This dimension occupies the same
space and time, although it is in a different vibratory state. In the Qabalah,
that reality is represented by the Sephirah Binah. Binah is associated with
the Holy Ghost of Christianity, the Spirit Element, awakened through the
Kundalini. It is the foundation of all that is.
A full Kundalini awakening is an awakening of the Body of Light so
that we can intuitively read the energy of Binah while living a physical
existence. This concept goes hand-in-hand with what we have been
examining so far and all the different components that make up the totality
of the Kundalini awakening experience.
Since the Kundalini awakening releases the Soul from the physical
body, it transforms the Self on all levels through the influx of Light energy in
the Aura. Light energy filters into each of the Seven Chakras since each

Chakra is one of the colours of the rainbow, as part of the White Light
spectrum.
As each Chakra is expressive of a Cosmic Plane, the awakening of the
Kundalini allows the individual to exist on all Planes of existence
simultaneously. Their Tree of Life becomes fully open, and each of its
respective Sephiroth (states of consciousness) fully accessible. The
individual consciousness expands, resulting in unification with the Cosmic
Consciousness above.
Since Binah is one of the Supernal Sephiroth on the Tree of Life, it
belongs to the Spirit Element. Binah is also the Sphere of faith and the
mental faculty of intuition. As awakened individuals become Beings of
Light, they connect with the Solar Light energy from the Sun, which is
expressive of the truth of all things. The Solar Light conveys Archetypes,
coupled with the Lunar Light of the Moon that reflects thoughts. In this way,
the intuition can perceive beyond the physical senses through the sixth’s
sense of Ajna Chakra.
The Soul leaves the physical body during sleep and enters one of the
Cosmic Planes external to the Self, although reflected in the Aura. In other
words, the idea of distance does not pertain to the Soul’s journey in the
Cosmic Planes, as it can be projected wherever it wants to go in an instant.
The Aura is the Microcosm of the Macrocosm, meaning that everything in
the outer Universe is also within the Aura. Through this Principle or Law,
the Soul can Astral travel during dream states, especially Lucid Dreams.
After a full Kundalini awakening and transformation, once the
individual attunes to the workings of the higher Chakras, the mind becomes
bypassed, and illusions vanish. The individual begins to fully function on
intuition as the Lunar Chakra, Ajna, reads the Archetypal energy from the
Solar Chakra, Sahasrara, enabling one to live in truth and Light.
As we gain an intimate relationship with Binah, we can understand the
unreality of the Physical World at a deep level, which allows us to transcend
the World of Matter and see life as something not to be taken too seriously.
We realize that our Souls are sparks of consciousness from the Sun that will
live on past this life. This understanding brings much joy, happiness, and
inspiration into our lives, allowing us to reach our full potential and manifest
our dreams and goals in life.

Sleep Paralysis

Lucid Dreaming can be such a powerful experience where the force of
your dreams engulfs you so that you undergo sleep "paralysis," meaning that
the consciousness is so involved in the Lucid Dream reality that it does not
want to pull itself out of it. Sleep paralysis can go on for over a dozen hours
at a time. However, you can experience a lifetime of joy and happiness
beyond Time and Space in the Lucid Dream world within that same amount
of time.
Sleep paralysis can be an issue if you have things to do in the morning
the next day. You will need to learn to deal with this because if you are
experiencing it, it won't be straightforward to snap out of it until you
naturally awaken. I had this issue, especially during the first two to three
years after the awakening. Some nights I would sleep in for up to sixteen
hours, completely unable to get up until the experience finished. Sleep
paralysis is more common in the earlier years of the Kundalini awakening
than in the later years as your consciousness is becoming adjusted to the
Inner Worlds that open up within you to explore.
Once you try to wake up from sleep paralysis while in a Lucid Dream,
you will be putting an incredible strain on your brain since your brain's
cycles will still be resonating with this Inner reality. In addition, the brain's
activity is heightened during sleep paralysis since the brain is under the
impression that what it is experiencing is real.
While undergoing sleep paralysis, you will have overcome your
physical body since a Lucid Dream is an Out-of-Body Experience. During
this time, your physical body will feel numb to your consciousness, and your
Mind's Eye will be undergoing extreme hyperactivity. The Lucid Dream is
experienced entirely through the Mind's Eye, as you vault through it and out
of the Crown into the higher Cosmic Planes. As your consciousness becomes
adjusted to the Lucid Dream reality over time, it will learn to differentiate
between the Inner reality and the Outer reality. As such, you will be able to
switch in and out of these two states on command. This learnable skill will
develop with experience.
I have never heard of sleep paralysis being detrimental to you or your
health. As mentioned, the main challenge is waking up from it when it is
required of you to do so. If you find yourself Lucid Dreaming almost
nightly, you may encounter this issue, so be ready when it happens. It will
help if you have excuses prepared on hand if you cannot make your morning

plans. Simply saying "I can't wake up" is not going to cut it in the modern
world.
Also, keep in mind that while you are undergoing sleep paralysis, you
will look possessed to other people who view you while in this state, so be
careful who has access to your room while you are sleeping. I recommend
that you tell whoever you live with about this issue, so they will leave you
alone if they find you in this state.
I remember many times trying to wake up from sleep paralysis, and the
moment that I would force myself to open my eyes and sit up, the Inner
reality grabbed hold of me and pushed me back down on the bed. It does not
help that when you are Lucid Dreaming, your physical body feels so heavy
like it is made of lead. You may sometimes feel like the Outer and Inner
realities are fighting for supremacy over the consciousness. However, as
your consciousness becomes more aware of these different Inner Worlds and
experiences them, it will be able to shift in and out of other realities on
command.
It is not dangerous to be in sleep paralysis. Apart from being spacey and
tired afterwards, I have never experienced any other after-effects, nor have I
heard of any from other Kundalini awakened individuals. The tiredness
comes from all of your inner functions being involved in a Lucid Dream,
which puts further strain on your physical body instead of resting it.
I will also add that you may be having such a great time in this Lucid
Dream reality that you may not want to snap out of it no matter what you
need to do the next day. Also, be mindful that your body may heat up more
than usual during this time, resulting in profuse sweating. Undergoing sleep
paralysis enables the Kundalini energy to transform you from the inside, so
there is heightened Kundalini activity while in this state.

How to Induce a Lucid Dream
During the first two years of the awakening, I used to Lucid Dream
almost nightly. However, the second year after awakening Kundalini, I got
involved with the Golden Dawn, where I began the Five Elements Spiritual
Alchemy process through Ceremonial Magick, altering how I dream. While I
was working on each of the lower four Chakras, from the bottom up, the
Elemental energies would often put me in a dreamless state.
This process put lucid Dreaming on hold during this period since I
would allow outside energies to permeate my Aura and take hold of my

consciousness, which lessened the power of my Kundalini. As I described in
the introduction, I needed to do this so I could learn to function better in my
waking life since my mental and emotional Self was in complete disarray.
After tuning my Chakras and sufficiently Spiritually evolving, I stopped
working with Ceremonial Magick, which removed these foreign energies
from my Aura. As such, my Kundalini became more potent than ever, and
the Astral Light began building back up through food intake, enabling me to
start Lucid Dreaming again in a more balanced manner.
Over the years, I have discovered the most optimal methods to get
myself to slip out of my body during sleep and into a Lucid Dream. For
example, I have found that if I am lying on my back, with palms
outstretched, this will induce the Lucid Dream experience. If I am on my
side, the body is resting, and consciousness cannot leave it since it is too
engrained in physicality. However, if I wanted to induce a Lucid Dream
consciously, I would set the alarm for six to seven in the morning, which
gave my physical body enough time to rest (five hours at least) if I went to
bed between midnight and one in the morning. Then, before going back to
sleep, I would sometimes tell myself to wake up in the dream, which I found
worked. Other times I didn't need to trick my mind in any way, but the
buildup of Astral Light was so intense that it pulled me into a Lucid Dream.
It is essential to allow yourself to exit from the physical body and into a
Lucid Dream without consciously fighting this experience. If you induce
fear or anxiety as you try to achieve this, you will most likely fail. Also,
keep in mind that the physical body needs to be fully rested to accomplish
this. If the physical body is still tired, consciousness cannot vault out of it.
And if the body is rested but the brain is not, you may not go into a Lucid
Dream but may even go into a deep sleep. The brain needs to be rested so
that it can resonate with Alpha brain waves necessary to induce this
experience.
For a few years after the initial Kundalini awakening, my body was so
built up with Light energy that I would slip into a Lucid Dream right when I
went to bed. As I lay on my back with palms outstretched, I would feel
myself exiting from my body while still being conscious. While my eyes
were closed, they would roll upwards naturally, trying to look at the back of
my head. Doing so tuned my consciousness with my Mind's Eye, enabling
me to vault through its doughnut-shaped portal. Consciousness has to pass
through the Mind's Eye portal to exit out of Sahasrara, the Crown Chakra,

fully. The Bindu Chakra also plays a part in this experience, and it needs to
be unobstructed and unblocked to achieve this.

Off-World Experiences in Lucid Dreams
When I was experiencing Chakras above the Crown, I visited vast and
majestic, never-before-seen lands and experienced emotional rapture that is
the stuff of legends. My boundless consciousness vaulted me across Time
and Space to the furthest reaches of our Galaxy, where I could expand my
Being to the size of a Solar System and beyond and witness Cosmic events
akin to supernovas. Other times I was transported to different Planets in and
out of our Solar System to communicate with the Beings that live there
(Figure 157) and experience their environments. I will never forget the
transcendental feeling that these off-world experiences brought on. It is as if
my Soul touched infinity and could go anywhere it wanted. And the best part
is that I was fully conscious while it was happening.
The beauty and mysticism of the foreign lands I visited are
unprecedented, affirming that I left our Planet through consciousness. Just
being able to reach and experience the energy of these other worlds has been
a true gift of the Kundalini awakening. It confirmed something that I had
always known even without definitive proof: we are not alone in the
Universe.
What I found most interesting about these Planetary visitations is that
they all had atmospheres that could harbour life, with plants, animals, and
humanoids that lived there. I say humanoid because most non-human
intelligent Beings I have contacted in the past seventeen years looked like us
for the most part. They were often taller or had bigger eyes or fairer skin.
Some had pointy ears or different shaped heads, while others had longer
limbs and other variations of our body parts. I even encountered pure Light
Beings on our Planet that presented themselves to me as Gods. In my many
experiences, some Beings spoke to me in different languages, which I could
somehow comprehend, while others directly communicated to me
telepathically.
In one of my more recent off-world Lucid Dream experiences, I visited
a Planet where plants, animals, and humanoids lived in complete harmony
with one another, sharing their Planet's resources. Plant life was incorporated
as part of the infrastructure in this world, and animals were roaming the
streets interacting with the humanoids. The experience began with my

consciousness projecting into their atmosphere, flying, and looking down on
the terrain from above. Although I can get around the Cosmos with intent
alone, my consciousness needs a vehicle to get around during Lucid Dreams,
which is the Kundalini activated Body of Light.
Once I descended, I could not walk fifty steps without encountering a
body of water, which was integrated with the vegetation and buildings as
part of a whole. The entire scene looked like some futuristic theme park with
animals walking around everywhere. Most of their animals were
quadrupeds, comparable in size to the humanoids.
When I paid no attention to the animals, they usually ignored me back.
At the same time, if I got scared by seeing an animal's unusual appearance,
my fear of it would cause it to get defensive and sometimes even try to
attack me. The animal matched my energy for the most part, which explains
why so many of our Planet's animals are in enmity with humans since we
generally don't treat them with love and respect.
I have found that every off-world experience is different. Sometimes
the plants and animals were much greater in size than ones on Earth, while at
other times, they were smaller. The plants' shapes, textures, and colours were
always striking and unusually different. The animals also had strange
features and characteristics.
Hollywood movies do an excellent job of depicting what other worlds
would look like if we could make our way there physically. However, most
people are unaware that we don't need rockets to go to outer space and
experience Extraterrestrial life; we can accomplish this through
consciousness. Through the Body of Light and the Lucid Dream world, we
can trek vast distances of space in a split second and come back with lifechanging experiences that alter our view of ourselves and our place in the
Universe.

Figure 157: Close Encounters of the Fifth Kind
How much intelligent life exactly is there in the Universe? All one
needs to do is follow the logic. If Earth is the only Planet that can harbour
life in our Solar System, and there are billions of other Solar Systems in the
Milky Way Galaxy alone, then imagine the potential. And don't forget that
the Milky Way Galaxy is just one of the billions of Galaxies in the Universe.
The number is astronomical, unlimited, and infinite even. And since we are
all sharing our existence in this beautiful and vast Cosmos, our paths
frequently may cross while roaming these other dimensions. When we touch
each other and transmit energy to one another, whether intentional or not, it
is always a very blissful and beautiful experience.
As a final note, I want to mention that I never felt any hostility from
other off-world Beings since they constantly communicated to me with pure
love. And I always reciprocated and shared with them as I would with a
family member. Sometimes these communications would occur in deep
dream states as part of one continuous stream of consciousness. However, as
I would consciously become aware of the experience and my Ego turned on,
the contact would often abruptly end. Therefore, I tried to keep my Ego in
neutral without getting too excited when these contacts were happening to
prolong the experience as long as possible.
Not only did these experiences touch my Soul and leave a lasting
impact on me for the rest of my life, but often I would walk away with
incredible knowledge and understanding about the nature of the Cosmos,
humanity, and the purpose of life in general. Furthermore, it made me realize
that all living things in the Universe, no matter what Planet or Galaxy they
are from, have one primary goal in life that they pursue at all costs: Spiritual
Evolution.

PART IX:
KUNDALINI-LOVE, SEXUALITY, AND
WILLPOWER

LOVE AND RELATIONSHIPS
A Kundalini awakening is the first step of a complete transformation in
your mind, body and Soul. As this experience will evolve into such a radical
shift from who you used to be, one of your main challenges will be to
integrate into society and to try to blend in with others. Although you will be
a different person now, to people who have known you your whole life, you
will still be the same no matter what you share with them.
Interestingly, once someone has gotten to know you, especially a family
member or a close friend, it becomes almost impossible to change their mind
about you. The only way they can start to view you differently is when they
see a change in your behaviour over a longer period of time. One of the
distinct ways in which your behaviour will be altered is in your expressions
of love towards other people. As such, this topic requires in-depth
examination.
Firstly, love has many expressions and is the foundation of many
things. It is the source of inspiration, creativity, faith, joy, romance, and other
positive things in life. It is also the source of unity between people and the
energy that binds us. It makes us laugh and cry together. It also inspires us to
embrace one another and to procreate. The bonds which we have created
over time with others we either inherited or we built over time. The inherited
relationships are with family members, while friendships are something we
earned during our lives. We also created bonds with romantic partners and
may have chosen one partner with whom to build a family and spend the rest
of our lives.
Understanding the source and fuel of the Kundalini energy will enable
us to understand love better. In essence, Kundalini energy is part sublimated
Pranic energy and part sublimated sexual energy. This Life energy gives us
vitality and affects our inner being on every level. Kundalini awakenings
result in Heart expansions, or the increase of Love energy, at the core of your
being. A Heart expansion is the natural expression of your Heart Chakra as
you integrate the energy of love in your mind, body, and Soul. Your Heart
Chakra becomes expanded, which will feel like a complete release in the
Astral (Emotional) and Mental Planes.
As love energy builds up in your Heart Chakra, Anahata, you will no
longer feel at the mercy of negative thoughts since they will lose the ability

to impact you like they used to. This release will also be felt in your
emotions as the love energy permeates your heart, purifying and washing
away your negative emotions. Remember always that love energy cleanses
and clears all thoughts and emotions. It is the Universal reconciler and
purifier of all negative energy, no matter on what Cosmic Plane it may be
manifesting.
Once your Heart Chakra is filled with love energy, this energy will filter
into your physical heart. You will now be carrying love energy with you on
all levels of Being. With so much love present, your heart will be more
powerful than ever, which will give you a noticeably stronger heartbeat and
often elevated heart rate. Love energy is synonymous with Light energy
since Light is the essence of love. And Kundalini energy is Astral Light, or
sublimated sexual energy, which is love. Remember always that you cannot
have the Kundalini without love and Light, and vice versa. In essence, all
three terms mean the same thing.

The Four Forms of Love
According to the Ancient Greeks, there are four different forms of love:
Eros, Philia, Storge, and Agape. Eros is erotic, passionate, romantic love that
involves sexual attraction. Romantic love is generally expressed between
people of the opposite Soul genders since every human being is either an
expression of Shiva or Shakti (Figure 158). Thus, romantic love transcends
the expression of gender on the Physical Plane. Sexual expression involves
the physical body because it is associated with sensation and pleasure from
physical acts like kissing and sexual intercourse.
The second form of love, Philia, is the love of friends and equals. Philia
is the love of short-term and long term friends, some of whom go back to our
childhood. Friends are freely chosen and generally share common values,
interests, and activities. Friends reflect who we are; we see ourselves in our
friends and who we choose to give our time to. Philia is love that is
expressed through the mind. Since it involves opening up to friends and
exchanging our beliefs and imperfections, Philia can be very beneficial to
our growth in many areas of life.
The third form of love, Storge, is the love of parents for children and
vice versa. However, Storge goes beyond the immediate family to include all
family members in your family tree that share the same DNA. Storge is
essentially the bonds we inherited in this lifetime through chance. The

difference between Philia and Storge is that we are obligated to express love
to family and show gratitude, while friends we can pick and choose. The
catalyst behind Storge is our memories since family members have been a
part of us since birth.
And finally, the fourth form of love, Agape, is unconditional love and
empathy for all humanity. This love for other people, regardless of
circumstances, is called selfless love. Agape is the greatest of the four types
of love; it is the Universal love we freely share with all human beings. The
source of Agape is our love of God and a recognition that we are all brothers
and sisters from the same Creator.
Agape is expressed through the Spirit. As mentioned, the purpose of a
full Kundalini awakening is to undergo a complete Spiritual transformation
to become a permanent embodiment of Agape. Since I have already
discussed Agape to a large extent, I want to focus on how a Kundalini
transformation affects our other love expressions, namely romantic love,
love of friends, and familial love.

Romantic Love
After awakening Kundalini, love energy will naturally manifest into
your life and filter into your relationships with other humans. In terms of
romantic love, you will find all barriers fall away in your ability to attract
lovers. Also, you will find that as you progress further with your Kundalini
transformation and get more and more in tune with love energy, your
charisma will heighten.
You will become almost irresistible to the opposite sex. This happens
because as we tune in to our centre, we realize that it is not what we do but
how we do it that makes us attractive to the outside world. Our base energy
attracts others, not the words we say. Through this process, you become
genuine and operate with a magnetic purpose that people around you can
detect energetically.
The personality is something that the Ego uses to relate to the outside
world. In the case of romantic love, it stands in the way of communicating
from the heart. The opposite sex can feel if you communicate with your Ego
or with your Soul. If you try to use the Ego to attract a mate, the other
person's Ego reacts, which immediately puts them on the defensive, and no
love energy is created or channelled.

For a genuine connection to be built, there has to be a two-way love
energy circuit formed between both people. This circuit starts with
communicating from the Heart Chakra, Anahata, which is then reciprocated
naturally. Understanding this concept will shed light on why finding the right
thing to say to attract a female does not work for most males. This effect
occurs because it is not about what is said; it is about the energy that
underlies the said things. Females are more emotional than males, and
therefore males are successful in attracting females only when they have
come up to their emotional level for their intentions to be understood. If the
intentions are impure, the female will detect this and become defensive.
Most intentions from the Ego carry negative Karmic consequences
since the Ego is always pondering, "What's in it for me?" Hence, there is a
control or manipulation factor with the Ego to get what it wants, like having
sexual relations with someone just because they look good. On the other
hand, intentions projected from the Soul are generally pure. For example, the
Soul will become attracted to someone in a romantic sense and want to get to
know them, and then sexual relations will naturally occur without being the
first thing in the person’s mind. For this reason, you will hear both males and
females say they have a "connection," implying that their Souls are in
communication and not the Egos.
Two Souls of the opposite gender that share love energy can create an
energetic "spark", activating the romantic love between them. However, for
this spark to occur, other factors have to come into place as well, such as
chemistry and compatibility. This energetic reaction results in a chemical
reaction in the body, activating feel-good neurotransmitters (dopamine and
norepinephrine) that generate romantic love feelings.

Figure 158: Shiva and Shakti in a Loving Embrace
As human beings, our main desire is to love and be loved. People who
have no wealth and have not accomplished any of the goals society imposes
on them and have instead spent their lives loving from the heart will attract

love back and be in a position to find true happiness. Then there are people
who have obtained high levels of wealth and success but are terrible at
attracting lovers because they come from the place of Ego rather than love.
This energy works against them in attracting a mate. They wonder why they
can't seem to make it happen, while the poor, less well-off person has ten
times more success in this area. The secret is in channelling love energy,
nothing more.
When it comes to romance, if you are attuned to the love in your heart,
you will give off an energy that will attract others to you. This formula
works for both males and females. This feeling, when genuine, generates
pure magnetism in a magical way. Your charisma is increased tenfold, as is
your ability to connect with every human being, whether a child or an older
person. When you speak, you reach right into the Soul of another human
being, and the personality barrier is broken through completely. Remember
that the Ego uses the personality as its reference point while the Soul uses
the character. Therefore, you must bypass the Ego when attracting a mate.
By speaking from the Soul, you immediately create rapport and a
connection with all human beings, and with potential mates, an attraction is
formed no matter how you may look physically. Sexual attraction is not
about looks; it is about the energetic connection between two people. This
connection is what people mean by "good vibes," that we all seek when
meeting new people.

Love of Friends
In the case of friendships with other people, you will find yourself
easily connecting to others once you build up the love energy in your Heart
Chakra. You will become a confidant and best friend to many people in your
life. As you cut through the lens of the personality, you can communicate to
the Souls of other people directly, and they feel this in their core. By sensing
your love energy, a person will feel they can trust you, which will create a
stronger bond between you. Because of this feeling, friends naturally will
want to respond with an equal amount of love energy or more.
We develop an attachment to one another through friendships which
gives us feelings of calm, security, social comfort, and emotional union.
Attachment is associated in the brain with neuropeptides oxytocin and
vasopressin; while males experience more of a rise in vasopressin levels,
females experience a rise in oxytocin. We find these chemicals also involved

in expressions of familial love and romantic love between longer-term
partners.
A Kundalini awakening makes you stop taking life so seriously since
you realize that your essence belongs to Eternity and your Soul will live on
past physical death. Moreover, by recognizing the unreality of the material
world, more love energy will fill your heart, which will increase your
capacity for humour. Spiritual people are very lighthearted, and their
aptitude for joking and comedy is much higher than the average person.
Humour adds fun to a conversation, and it is a fantastic outlet for saying
what is on your mind without being judged and scrutinized by others. It
creates and maintains bonds between people since it creates irresistible
positive emotions. Humour takes the edge off the seriousness of life because
everything is impermanent at its core, except the Spiritual substance that
underlies all things. As such, comedy gets us in touch with the Spirit by
breaking the intellectual constructs of the mind. Humour is abstract; it is
beyond logic. We laugh at something because it is so illogical that we can't
wrap our minds around it, so we laugh to break the tension. Remember, the
mind is linear, while the heart is not. For this reason, humour is the language
of the Soul.
Spending time with friends is a joyous activity that involves plenty of
good laughs in most cases. After all, we want to spend time with certain
people because we feel good around them. They make us smile and laugh
and bring insight and wisdom into our lives. In this sense, you will be an
asset for friends and someone they want always to keep close to them.
The Law of Love states that by giving out or sending love, you will
receive it threefold. This Law is an ancient mystery that many Adepts of
Light are aware of. Love truly does make the world go round. It keeps things
moving, progressing, and evolving. So, naturally, while you learn to channel
love energy to other people, your friend base expands exponentially.
I have accumulated many, many friends throughout my journey and
continue to do so. And it all comes very naturally to me since I talk directly
to a person's Soul. People recognize my good intentions the instant I open
my mouth, which dismantles their defences. To this day, everyone around
me wonders how I can talk to a stranger like I have known them my whole
life. The answer is very simple—I am being myself. And by being myself,
my True Self, it attracts people to me.

Everyone wants to bond and connect; it is at the deepest level of our
Being. As such, welcome new friends into your life and invest your energy
with them. Take a chance to be yourself when meeting someone new and
have faith in the process. You may be surprised at the outcome. We
recognize ourselves in other people because we are all God at our deepest
core. And, as you keep being yourself with strangers, you will develop the
ability to make new friends, which is a skill you can use for the rest of your
life.
The Kundalini naturally wants us to be in the moment, in the Now, as it
allows us to channel love energy and be extroverted. If you were a more
introverted person before the Kundalini awakening, you would experience
this shift as time goes on. When we are extroverted, we seek to bond with
other people and channel and share love energy. On the other hand, when we
are introverted, we dwell inside our minds.
Since the mind is expressive of the subconscious, it is an area where
fear manifests. As such, introverted people often get anxiety from the idea of
interacting with others and making new friends. The concept of bonding
with others requires them to share about themselves and be extroverted,
which can be challenging when you are within yourself practising self-love.
By only using yourself as your love energy source, you cut yourself off from
other people that can help you recharge. Being introverted will not help you
make new friends, although it won't affect the friendships you made before
you became introverted.
Kundalini is creative, love energy which always seeks to express itself
somehow. Comedy is an artistic expression since it requires you to think
abstractly to make jokes and have fun with other people. Welcome comedy
in your life and let it become a part of you. Be a beacon of love for yourself
and others. Allow the experience of channelling love to friends to aid you in
learning more about yourself and the Universe that you are a part of.

Familial Love
As the Kundalini sublimates more and more through the intake of food
and water, Love energy accumulates in your heart and the Kundalini circuit.
During this time, family ties become renewed, and you develop a stronger
bond with all family members, especially your parents and siblings. Your
family is special, especially your immediate family that has been with you
for most of your life. You realise this as you are going through the Kundalini

transformation journey, especially the later years, resulting in an ethical
standpoint towards your family.
For me, after twelve years of living with awakened Kundalini, a strong
desire developed to connect with my parents and try to understand them
from a different perspective. Not in a way where it's always about me and
my needs and how annoying they are with their nagging that most parents
do. But in a way where I look beyond my instinctual defensive reaction to
them and recognise the continual sacrifice they make for my sister and me.
The level of love they must have for us to always put us first even when we
are being bad.
Indeed, the love a parent has for a child is something special. And
learning to appreciate your parents' love develops a sense of honour towards
them, a duty to repay them with the same amount of patience and love even
if it takes you your entire life. And if you have had issues with your parents
in the past and feel that you didn't get the attention you deserved, now is the
time to work out those issues and reconnect with them.
By becoming the change you wish to see in the world, people will
naturally change to adjust to the new you. But it takes effort on your part to
make that change, including not blaming others for things not being like you
want them to be. It is on you to take responsibility for every relationship in
your life and realise that you can make the change.
It is easy to get out of friendships, and romantic relationships you may
find are not working anymore, but relations with your family members are
for life. They are God-given and cannot be escaped in this lifetime, even if
you want to run from them. Even in the worst situations and scenarios, you
need to forgive your parents instead of harbouring negativity towards them,
even when you feel it is deserved. You need to understand the amount of
Karmic effect they have on your life that won't get neutralised until you take
charge of the situation and apply unconditional love by forgiving their
transgressions towards you. Forgiveness will go a long way in this regard; it
will enable you to re-spark that energetic link between you, which is
necessary for your continual Spiritual development.
And if you have siblings, it is time to bond with them more than ever. If
they have wronged you, then forgive them and accept their love back in your
life. I have been blessed to have had the most fantastic relationship with my
parents and sister. For this, I am most grateful. But I recognise that not
everyone has been blessed in such a way and that many people have

challenging relationships with their family members. In any case, you need
to forgive whatever wrongs were done to you, no matter how difficult it may
be. Your goal, your mission, is to keep growing Spiritually.
Healing your relationship with your parents is most important because
our parents influenced us the most, sometimes inadvertently, through DNA
and conditioning. For example, the expression of your masculine energy and
how you channel this energy, especially to male friends in your life, reflects
your relationship with your father. Conversely, how you express your
feminine energy, relating to how you channel that energy towards females in
your life, reflects your relationship with your mother.
And in terms of romantic love, you will be attracting people who will
help you overcome the Karmic energy between you and your parents. If you
are a male, then you will be attracted to females that remind you of your
mother and the Karma that needs to be overcome between you two. If you
are a female, then vice versa. This Universal Principle manifests
subconsciously, whether you like it or not. Its purpose is to help us learn to
love one another and further our Spiritual Evolution.
Let us not be confused about the application of this Universal Principle
as it pertained to the immoral and perverse theories of Sigmund Freud.
Referred to as the Oedipus Complex, Freud concluded through faulty
research that all young boys and girls have incestuous desires for their
opposite-sex parents and see same-sex parents as rivals. Freud's error in
judgement lay in transposing his troubled childhood and the unusual and
strange relationship with his parents, especially his mother, to his
psychology work.
In modern times, the Oedipus Complex is not recognised as a real thing
in the psychology field since it has no basis in reality. Nevertheless, Freud
must have realised that we attract partners that remind us of our parents but
erred in judgment in applying this Universal principle. His conclusions were
affected by his own life experience and unresolved issues in his
subconscious, which must have been triggered when he realised that this
Universal Principle exists.
The attraction between the sexes occurs subconsciously and relates to a
behaviour that we recognise in another person that reminds us of our parents.
In essence, this attraction develops so that we can heal mentally and
emotionally. After all, our parents were the first Archetypal male and female
that we identified in our lives. We grew up under their care and the

guidelines they set for us. As a result, our Soul and Ego evolved, trying to
appease our parents while also trying to break free from them and become
independent.
Depending on the polarity of our Souls, we learned to imitate either our
father or mother's behaviour and integrate it as our own. And as we accepted
their love, we learned to love others as well. This expression of love then is
most influenced by our relationship with our parents. However, understand
that this Universal Principle of attraction only applies to the Mental and
Emotional Planes. Physical attraction is something different entirely.
Depending on the quality of your relationship with your parents, it will
affect the quality of your romantic relationships. You will notice that when
your relationship with your parents changes for the better as you learn to
communicate with them Soul to Soul, this will heal those parts of the Self,
allowing you to attract different people in your life for romantic purposes.
In the case of abusive parents, it is most common to be attracted to
abusive partners since you are programmed to relate to the opposite sex
through mental and emotional abuse. However, as you overcome and forgive
this abuse from your parents, you will invariably attract people in your life
who treat you well and will learn to stay away from abusive people. This is
the most common expression in our society of this Universal Principle since
we all know people who were mistreated by their parents and, in return,
attract abusive romantic partners.

KUNDALINI AND SEXUAL ENERGY
It is essential now to talk about the role of sexual energy in the
Kundalini awakening process. The Kundalini energy is powered by sexual
energy channelled inwards through the spinal column and into the brain. I
say powered because once the Kundalini is awakened, the buildup of sexual
energy coupled with Pranic energy from food intake causes the expansion of
consciousness over time.
Sexual energy can also be an impetus or catalyst behind the Kundalini
awakening. It is the sublimation of this sexual energy through Tantric sex
practice or a form of meditation, which causes it to go inwards to activate
the Kundalini at the base of the spine. Without this activation, the Kundalini
lies dormant as latent energy potential in the Root Chakra, Muladhara.
What is sexual energy exactly? Sexual energy is creative energy within
the Self fueled by Muladhara and Swadhisthana Chakras. It powers and
sustains our minds while being a significant source of inspiration. While our
carnal desires come from Muladhara, the Earth Chakra, Swadhisthana, the
Water Chakra, is responsible for the tangible emotion of sexual desire.
When we focus our sexual energy on a person we are attracted to, we
create a powerful desire to be with that person. Sexual desire is felt in
Swadhisthana Chakra as a euphoric emotion akin to butterflies or tingling in
your abdomen. This energy is then projected from our abdomen area into our
brains through the nervous system.
Sexual energy relates to Apana Vayu since it involves the workings of
Muladhara and Swadhisthana Chakras and the expulsion of sexual liquids
from the body (semen in males and vaginal fluid in females). In contrast,
Pranic energy is generated by Samana Vayu (the digestive fire) and Hara
Chakra, the body's storehouse of Prana.
Sexual energy also powers our imagination when channelling it into the
Heart Chakra, Anahata, thereby stimulating our minds and thoughts. Sexual
energy also affects our Soul centre, the Solar Plexus Chakra, Manipura. It
kindles the Fire of Manipura while energizing our willpower. It becomes
dynamic energy that fuels our drive, motivation, and determination on the
Mental Plane.
When sexual energy is projected into the Root Chakra, Muladhara, it
becomes our impetus for action on the Physical Plane. Therefore, sexual

energy is used by all our Chakras. Although Pranic energy is considered a
blind force, sexual energy is intelligent. However, both energies are
necessary to power our Chakras and bring them to life.
While Prana is Life or Light energy, sexual energy is the energy of
creation. It is sometimes difficult to discern between sexual energy and
Prana, and many Spiritual teachers confuse the two and even say they are the
same thing. However, from examining my energy system over the years, I
have found that they are two distinct energy types that work with each other
and require each other to fulfil their functions.
Also, it is vital to distinguish between Kundalini energy and sexual
energy. Along with Prana, sexual energy powers the Kundalini energy once
awakened. However, Kundalini energy has its own components related to the
expansion of consciousness and expressions of Self.
Once Kundalini is activated, sexual energy becomes essential since it
animates the Kundalini, allowing you to tap into your new abilities. For
example, you cannot use the enhanced creativity and imagination to their
highest potential if you lack in sexual energy needed to tap into them. Sexual
energy is a more subtle force than mere Prana as it allows us to access any
part of ourselves when we focus our minds.
There is a direct correlation between sexual stimulation and the activity
of the Kundalini, which lies in the Earth Chakra. As you get sexually
excited, you create a static electric charge that can spark the Kundalini
energy into motion the same way you would jump-start a car battery.
Therefore, building up sexual excitement through Tantric practices and
turning it inwards could result in a powerful Kundalini awakening.
Why is there a correlation between sexual arousal and the awakening of
Kundalini? The answer may lie in our life's purpose here on Earth, which is
a testing ground for Souls. For example, God-the Creator created human
beings and gave us Free Will to choose how we want to express our sexual
energy: look to gratify the Ego by desiring to have sex as a form of physical
pleasure or use this same energy and draw it inwards through Tantric
practices to awaken our latent Kundalini energy. In the case of a physical
climax or orgasm, we expel this energy out of us and release it back into the
Universe. When we draw this energy inwards through the brain via the
nervous system, we seek to transform Spiritually. Every moment of the day
is a test of our Free Will and whether we want to exalt our Soul or Ego who
seek to do radically different things with this Divine energy.

Most people are entirely unaware that there is another reason they have
sexual energy within them since they are so focused on using it merely for
pleasure. The world's population is more driven by sexual impulse and the
desire for sex than anything else in life. If people only knew another way to
use this gift, it could completely transform how we perceive sexual energy. I
believe that this is one of the essential roles Kundalini awakened individuals
play in the world right now: not only to be emissaries of the Kundalini
energy but also to enlighten people on the power and potential of their
sexuality.

Sexual Arousal and Being "Horny"
The masculine sexual energy relates to the Fire of the Earth Element. It
is strongly driven by the Physical Plane, which acts on the Astral Plane of
the Water Element. The Fire of Earth transforms into the emotion of sexual
excitement through Swadhisthana Chakra.
While males are more motivated by their Earth Chakra regarding sexual
arousal, females are influenced more by the Water Chakra. This explains
why sexual arousal in males is strongly influenced by a female’s physical
appearance, while a female is more turned on by how a male makes her feel.
The masculine sexual energy is like a fire that comes on quickly, burns
brightly and becomes extinguished promptly. Conversely, feminine sexual
energy is like water: slow to heat up, but once it boils, it keeps going for a
long time. A male’s Fire energy is responsible for warming up a female’s
Water energy. Therefore, males spend their time and energy working on their
Alpha qualities to attract females. On the other hand, females spend a lot of
time and energy on improving their physical appearance to be more
attractive to males.
While men generally have stronger libidos, women have an increased
range and intensity of arousal. A male can get an erection seemingly with no
stimulation and feel sexually excited or "horny." In contrast, it is rare for a
woman to feel the same without being stimulated first. Part of the reason is
that a male’s body is driven by testosterone, which is faster-acting than the
female sex hormone, estrogen.
The occult symbology and meaning of the word "horny" give us further
insight into how sexual arousal works and its purpose. Horny suggests
animal horns, symbolic of humanity’s animalistic nature. After all, we share
a desire for sexual relations and procreation with all Earth animals.

However, horns are also associated with the Devil and his Demonic minions
in Christianity and other religious and esoteric traditions. In fact, "Hornie" is
an 18th-century Scottish term for the Devil.
When a male becomes sexually aroused or horny, a Fire begins to burn
in their loins which enflames their whole Being (Figure 159). This Fire is
projected from their Earth Chakra, Muladhara, associated with the Physical
Plane and the World of Matter. Consequently, in the Tarot, The Devil Card is
referred to as the "Lord of the Gates of Matter." This is because the Devil
represents the Physical World, the antithesis of the Spiritual World of God.
To further add to the symbology, Capricorn, the Mountain Goat (a horned
beast), a Fire of Earth Zodiac Sign, is associated with the Devil Card in the
Tarot.
In the Hermetic Tarot, the Devil Tarot Card features a giant beast with
horns whose head is shaped like an inverted Pentagram, suggesting the
connection between the Lower Self, the Ego, and the Devil. The Devil has
large, bat wings and the lower body of an animal with a fire burning in his
loins (in some depictions). He is holding a torch in his left hand that points
downwards, towards the Earth, and has one hand pointing upwards, towards
the Heavens (As Above, So Below). He stands atop an altar to which are
chained two naked, male and female, humans, with horns. They are bound to
the Devil because of their lust for one another.
Lust is defined as the overwhelming desire to have sexual relations with
someone for the purpose of physical pleasure. Lust is the antithesis of love;
it is considered one of the seven deadly sins because of its often unbalanced
expression. The Devil and his minions are responsible for compelling
humanity to engage in the seven deadly sins. It is no wonder that the word
"Devilish" applies to someone being sinful, including engaging in a lot of
sexual activity with multiple partners.

Figure 159: Sexual Arousal in Males

Therefore, as Sahasrara Chakra attunes us to our Holy Guardian Angel,
our God-Self, the Earth Chakra connects us to its opposite—the Devil. Both
are personifications of the Self, which we can connect with through the
mind. However, the Devil is not wholly bad but is an expression of our
animal nature that we must respect and keep under check. Consequently, the
Earth Chakra is our doorway into the Devil’s Kingdom, the Demonic Realm
we call Hell. It is no coincidence that Hell or the Netherworld (Underworld)
is depicted as a fiery pit deep within the Earth’s crust.
One of the reasons Christianity and other religions have vilified sex is
its transformative power. Time and again, abstinence has shown its potential
in poisoning the mind and producing sick and perverted expressions that are
out of synch with nature and God. Conversely, engaging in sexual activity in
a balanced, respectful, and loving manner can lead to a Spiritual awakening.
So instead of demonising sex and creating an aversion towards sexual
relations as a way to get closer to God, we need to seek to understand it so
we can tap into its tremendous power.

Sexual Relations
Once you have had a full Kundalini awakening, you will understand the
true purpose of sexual intercourse and its symbolic significance as unifying
the masculine and feminine energies. This unification happens at the level of
the Mental Plane, which allows us to transcend the duality of the mind so
that we can reach the Spiritual Plane.
At birth, we were put into this world of duality and given either a male
or female body. As humans, we naturally seek to balance out our sexual
energies. One of the ways we do it is through sexual intercourse. We desire
to be with a person that complements our sexuality to find unity at a
Spiritual level. Sexual intercourse is a type of ritual that involves the
integration of two physical bodies. When the penis enters the vagina during
this process, the two bodies literally become one.
Between two people of opposite sexes both undergoing Kundalini
awakenings, sexual relationships can be a truly magical experience. The
Kundalini energy between them creates a kind of battery, thereby expanding
its power twofold. This expansion of Kundalini energy results in heightened
awareness and more profound transcendental experiences. It also allows the

partners to attune themselves to their respective Spiritual bodies at a degree
impossible to reach on their own.
One partner's energy fuels the other partner's energy. Since each
partner's Tree of Life is activated, so are the energies that comprise the
totality of their consciousness. When two Kundalini awakened partners
connect sexually, they are each fed at the deepest levels of their being by the
energy of one another, healing them simultaneously. The energy of one
partner pushes out the negativity of the other just by being in their presence,
as their Auras become intermingled. They don't even need to be touching for
this to occur. They simply have to be in the same vicinity as each other to be
on the same frequency or wavelength.
For Kundalini awakened individuals, the actual act of sexual
intercourse becomes Tantric. As a result, both partners are enabled to
experience internal orgasms due to the sexual energy being triggered at a
deeper level by one another's Kundalini. Throughout my Kundalini journey,
I have had the privilege of being with a few Kundalini awakened women,
and the sexual connection we shared was unbelievable. As soon as we got
near each other, it manifested as a heightened state of awareness, amplifying
our sexual energy to such a degree that I would find myself often trembling
just by being around them.
Sexual intercourse is a unification ritual, a type of bond or sublimation
of the sexes on the Physical Plane that induces the same effects on the Astral
and Mental Planes. Its purpose is to transcend the lower Cosmic Planes so
that the vibration of consciousness can raise and enter the Spiritual Plane. As
such, healing occurs on all levels, mind, body and Soul.

Retaining Your Sexual Energy
Another critical question regarding sexuality that I am often asked is
whether it is wise to ejaculate while the Kundalini process occurs. For
example, when it might be okay to ejaculate and when should one save their
seed? Keep in mind that males usually ask this question, although the same
principle applies to females.
Kundalini uses your sexual energy and the Prana from food to power
the Kundalini energy circuit. I have found that at peak points of this
sublimation/transformation process, it is essential to save your seed by
avoiding sex and masturbation altogether. Just one orgasm can rob you of
your vitality for up to 24 hours or more. This significantly hinders the

transformation process while allowing the Ego to have a stronger foothold in
the consciousness, causing fear and anxiety to amplify within you.
Sexual energy grows in power over time, and the longer you save your
seed, the more you are transforming the Kundalini on the inside. At its
highest peak, when you are feeling most sexually pent up and excited, sexual
energy is working with Prana to change the quality and state of the
Kundalini energy within you. This process is the transmutation, or
transformation of the raw fire of Kundalini into a more delicate, Spirit
energy which takes over, powering the system.
Now, I am not saying to be celibate like a monk or priest and never to
masturbate or have sex again. This would be unhealthy and
counterproductive to your growth since you must tend to the physical body
and its needs as well as your Spirituality. Instead, I am saying to abstain
from sexual release for the first period after the initial Kundalini awakening
and then re-integrate sex and masturbation back into your life in a balanced
fashion. Remember that a successful life is about balance, not neglecting one
thing for another.
However, once the Kundalini has been awakened, it is wise for a few
months to restrain from ejaculating altogether. This rule applies to both men
and women. Sexual energy is vital; if you ejaculate, you will feel lifeless and
drained, needing to rebuild your sexual energy somehow.
I have discovered that the body requires Zinc while rebuilding the
sexual energy within you after a release. Therefore, I suggest that instead of
waiting for your body to rebuild it naturally, take a Zinc supplement or eat
some fish or pumpkin seeds that contain high amounts of Zinc. Zinc is
essential because it is the battery acid, while the Kundalini acts as the
AC/DC electrical current. Without Zinc, the battery does not run at its
optimum capacity and needs to recharge.
Once you have awakened the Kundalini, depending on where you are in
your transformation process, you will develop the ability to embody other
people and feel their energy, including people you watch on television and in
movies. This "gift" may soon feel like a curse when you apply it to
pornography since it will enable you to feel what you are watching like it is
happening to you. There’s no need for a virtual reality set after you awaken
the Kundalini. However fun and exciting this can be at first, though, do not
allow yourself to develop a porn addiction and go backwards in your
Spiritual Evolution process.

You need to regulate masturbation and not engage in it more than once
or twice a week and only before bed so that your body can rebuild the sexual
energy by the morning. Since this process will go on for the rest of your life,
you need to treat your sexual energy with respect. You are no longer
functioning like an unawakened person who can masturbate and ejaculate
multiple times in the day and remain unaffected. You will feel robbed of
your vitality every time you ejaculate, so be mindful of this.
I have found that masturbation can be a great aid when you cannot
induce sleep otherwise since it allows you to welcome rest and turn out like
a light bulb once you drain your sexual energy. Pent up sexual energy can
make the mind haywire and even induce anger and aggression, especially in
males, which can keep one up at night. But again, try not to masturbate more
than a few times a week and only after the initial Kundalini
sublimation/transformation process is complete. How will you know it is
complete? You will feel a new type of energy working inside of you that
replaces the raw Kundalini Fire. This energy has a transcendental effect as it
grows and expands the consciousness more and more as time goes on.
As a final note on this topic, since having loving, sexual relations with
one partner can be beneficial for your Spiritual growth, I don't suggest that
you cut out sex entirely at any point in time without consulting your partner
first. If you callously abstain from sex with your partner without explaining
yourself, they might feel like something is wrong with them, which will
compromise the integrity of your relationship. This is unwise, especially if
you have good chemistry with that person and see a future with them.
Instead, communicate your needs with your partner and maybe make a
compromise to have sex once a week or every few weeks for a little while,
and then increase the frequency when you are past the point when you have
sublimated the Kundalini energy. Spilling your seed with a loved one can be
draining on the body, but it can be beneficial to your Spiritual Alchemy since
there is an exchange of positive, healing energy at a subtle level.
However, ejaculating through masturbation is absolute drainage of your
sexual essence into the Aethyr, with nothing in return. People who develop
porn addictions open themselves up to Demonic entities attaching
themselves to their Aura so they can feed off their released sexual energy.
An Incubus is a Demon in a male form that feeds off the sexual energy
of females. Conversely, a Succubus is a Demon in female form that feeds off
the sexual energy of males. Incubi and Succubi are known to seduce people

in dreams and have sexual relations with them so they can rob them of their
sexual essence by making them climax. They are also personified in the
mind by adult film actors when watching pornography.
People who feed these Demons often have a difficult time breaking free
of them and stopping their porn addictions. Pornography is free for a reason;
it is an empty void whose purpose is to steal people's sexual essence and
take away their potential to Spiritually transform. There is a political reason
for this, which is beyond the scope of this work, but I mention it here so that
you are aware of it and don't fall for its trap.

Sexual Cravings
Since Kundalini can be awakened by sexual energy turned inwards, it
means that we can expand its capacity, which invariably affects our sexual
urges. For example, when the Kundalini is at its peak transformation in the
initial stages after the awakening, you may feel like an animal in heat. As a
result, you may exhibit sexual cravings like you haven't experienced before.
Once the initial period of sexual energy sublimation is complete, though,
you will feel a release from this intense sexual excitement as your libido
becomes balanced.
However, since the process of sexual energy sublimation is ongoing,
and since you may experience short-circuits where you will need to rebuild
your energy channels, your sexual urges may fluctuate significantly for the
rest of your life. They often come in waves, where your sexual energy comes
on very strongly for a short period, bringing with it an intense urge for a
release, followed by an extended period when you are in balance.
However, when looking at the course of your entire life after awakening
Kundalini, your sexual energy will be relatively balanced. These fluctuations
I am talking about occur for about 20-30% of that time. Never forget that the
Kundalini is an intelligent energy that never gives us more than we can
handle.
When I recommended that you don't masturbate or have sex more than
a few times a week, I referred to this need that may develop for a sexual
release. There is no point in torturing yourself even when it is beneficial to
save your seed. Doing so will cause havoc in your mind and be
counterproductive to your growth.
Therefore, if you need a release, do it once or twice a week, but only at
night before sleep if masturbating. Get used to not being haphazard with

your sexual releases. You need to adopt a scientific approach to the inner
changes happening in your body, which is your laboratory. Take control over
this process instead of letting the process control you.
When your sexual energy is being generated, you will feel it build up in
your abdomen in Swadhisthana Chakra. Sometimes, it may come on so
strong that it makes you hyperventilate. Naturally, this period is when you
need to permit yourself to have balanced sexual activity in your life.
However, as powerful as these sexual urges may be, you need to be levelheaded and not take it as a sign to turn into a nymphomaniac and be
frivolous with your sexual activities.
It will be an incredible hindrance to your Spiritual path if you aren't
careful with whom you engage in sexual activities. Other than exposing
yourself to sexually transmitted diseases, you are putting yourself in a
position where you take on people's energies, good and bad, by having
sexual relations with them.
Instead, I advise you to find one consistent partner, someone with
whom you have good chemistry, even if it's just physical at first. Be
transparent about your intentions, and don't lead people on. If you put
yourself in a position where you can accrue bad Karma from being with
someone when all you need is a sexual release, you are better off
masturbating to take the edge off.
I recommend having sex over masturbation since sex exchanges vital
energy while masturbation does not. You will notice a difference in how you
feel after a release with either activity. Masturbation will leave you highly
drained after an orgasm, whereas sexual intercourse can make you feel
fulfilled after, with the right partner. You will need some time to rebuild your
sexual energy in either event. Masturbation will feel like it requires
significantly more time to rebuild after.
I mentioned that you need to save your seed as much as possible after
awakening Kundalini, but keep in mind that I primarily referred to the
window period when you are building up your energy channels through
sexual energy and Prana. I recognize that having a healthy sex life and
sexual release through masturbation is as natural as our organic bodies. After
all, your sexual energy can come on so strong that it makes you feel
possessed if you don't do something about it. However, as with all things in
life, being conscientious and controlling your actions is the key to success.
Listen to what your body is communicating to you and release some pressure

when needed. Balance in mind, body and Soul is the true path of the initiate
of Light.
You may also have a period in your life when you will have a
significantly lower sex drive, and your cravings for sex may seem nonexistent. Do not be alarmed if this happens; it is a normal part of the process.
Therefore, adjust to this period accordingly. It usually does not last very
long. However, it signals a time for introspection and building up the energy
through food intake when it does happen. Do not feel guilty if you cannot
satisfy your partner like you used to but let them know what is happening
and do what you can to get them to understand. If they do not and choose to
make you feel guilty because of this occurring to you, you need to rethink
your relationship with them.

SEXUAL ATTRACTION
All people want to be perceived as attractive to others to have an
abundance of love and relationships. However, most people don’t realize
that they have complete control over this process. There are Laws that
govern the process of attraction, especially sexual attraction, and those
people that know these Laws consciously can spark attraction in others with
the application of their willpower.
For example, a Kundalini awakened person, after many years of
personal transformation, becomes very attractive to other people. This is
because their changes in mind, body, and Soul alter how they think and
their behaviour, making them naturally attractive to everyone they meet. As
a result, these people have an easier time finding a romantic or sexual
partner and finding new friends in their lives.
Many awakened people overlook these personal changes and attribute
this newfound attraction to destiny or chance. In reality, there is an invisible
science behind it. The Laws concerning sexual attraction between humans
correspond with Universal Laws that govern all of Creation. Creation is, in
a sense, perfect, and the energy of attraction is one of the ways it seeks to
remain as such.
So what is sexual attraction then? The best way to explain sexual
attraction is to say that it is nature’s way of improving our gene pool. In
other words, sexual attraction is how nature ensures that the most evolved
humans will procreate and continue the existence of our race.
Nature is continually in the process of evolution, and those humans
who are in line with this Law and are masters of their realities are the ones
who have activated their latent DNA potential to become the best versions
of themselves. As a result, these people have become attractive to others,
which allows them to have an easier time finding a mate and procreating.
Even though sexual attraction is a natural expression, learning the
traits of these evolved people who exert dominance in their lives allows you
to "fake it until you make it." In other words, you don’t have to start off
being a sexually attractive person, but you can learn the behavioural traits
of these types of people and use these traits in your own life to be attractive
to others.

Understand that attraction applies to both men and women. You can
attract a romantic or sexual partner, but also new friends since all humans
naturally gravitate towards attractive people. We recognize something
special in attractive people and want to be around them. In reality, what we
perceive in these people is a better version of ourselves.

The First Two Minutes of Meeting
Attractive people are charismatic, free, and uninhibited in every way
we all want to be. They are leaders instead of followers and demand
attention at all times, even when they are silent. They are never afraid of
speaking their minds and are courageous and assertive. They are strongwilled and calm, even in the face of adversity.
Attractive people are often funny and entertaining but also relaxed,
calm, and collected. They have certain beliefs about themselves, which they
uphold at all times. These people do everything earnestly and with all of
their hearts. They are passionate and live life to its fullest, with no regrets.
They take what they want and make no excuses for their actions.
Even though you may not be exhibiting some of the qualities
mentioned above, do not despair. Nature allows us to remake ourselves
every moment in time, and you can use its Laws to start becoming an
attractive person. The key is to focus your energy on becoming attractive to
new people you meet since the first two minutes of meeting a new person
are the most critical. This means that if you exhibit certain qualities during
those first two minutes, you will have sparked attraction in the other person.
Attraction works in two ways. If a new person you meet is of the
opposite sex (depending on the polarity of their Soul), they will feel sexual
attraction towards you. If they are of the same sex, they will want to be your
friend. In both cases, if you spark attraction, you will have the power to
make that person a part of your life in some way.
Most people don’t realize that who we think we are is only real to us
and the people who know us. In other words, strangers have no idea who
we are. Thus, first impressions are crucial. Attraction has much to do with
the image of who you think you are and how you can manipulate that image
to present yourself to someone new you meet. Once you have created a
perception of yourself in those first two minutes, the other person will either
feel attraction towards you or not.

The essential factor to understand is that we have the power to mould
our image of ourselves through our willpower. Remember, we all have Free
Will, and how you exercise your Free Will impacts the level of attraction
you create in other people.

The Psychology of Attraction
When you want to come off as attractive, understand that it is not
about what you say to a person but how you say it. It is not the words but
the body language and vocal tonality that count. However, to go even
deeper, it is the inner energy with which you talk to a person that will cause
attraction or not.
Your demeanour must always be cool, and your vocal tonality must be
energetic and captivating, expressing power and dominance. These are the
behavioural traits of an Alpha personality. Alpha people are masters of their
realities. They are born leaders that take what they want. Being an Alpha is
a state of mind that exemplifies fortitude and stillness in emotions. Alphas
are not moved by things externally unless they choose to be. Their reality is
never compromised because they simply do not allow it. They run the show,
and others follow.
Alphas only talk to be heard by others. They do not seek approval, nor
do they speak to listen to the sound of their voice. Therefore, when you talk
to someone you desire to be attractive to, be mindful that what you are
saying is captivating. There must be power in your voice tonality and
intention present; otherwise, you will bore the other person. For example, if
someone yawns while you are talking, you failed. Whatever you say, you
must be talking directly to the other person's Soul.
You must learn to break through the barrier of other people's
personalities and their Egos. To accomplish this, you should look the other
person in the eyes the entire time while speaking with confidence. Your
power of purpose must be so strong that it is mesmerizing and hypnotizing
to others. The opposite sex should lose themselves in your energy.
Highly evolved Kundalini awakened people come from a higher place
when they speak to others. Since their consciousness is operating from the
Spiritual Plane, they are aligned with their True Will, which increases their
personal power. As such, they are powerful communicators who speak with
purpose and intent. People naturally gravitate towards them as their energy
is inspiring and uplifting to be around.

To become a naturally attractive person, you have to build yourself up
to be someone of solid values, ethics, and morals. You have to love yourself
and love life in general. If you love yourself and are content and satisfied
with your life when you are with a person of the opposite sex, you will
never come from a place of neediness but a place of desire. Think about this
for a second. When you need something, it means you lack something
within yourself. This idea is already unattractive, putting the other person
on the defensive.
A powerful method of sparking and maintaining sexual attraction is
being cocky and funny. Cockiness is defined as "being boldly or brashly
self-confident." Being cocky around others immediately puts you on a high
pedestal since you will come off as someone of high value. However, being
cocky can appear very arrogant, which is unattractive, so it helps to add a
proper dose of humour. Humour is fantastic because you can say what is on
your mind without being judged and scrutinized in the process.
Interestingly, using logic and reason to build attraction fails most
times. Keep in mind that attraction is not logical in any way. Logic is, in
fact, the antithesis to attraction. Being playful, speaking in metaphor, and
being indirect under all circumstances is a far more powerful way to spark
attraction. The conversation must be fun; otherwise, you will create no
attraction.
Once you have sparked attraction, the key behind maintaining that
attraction is to continually project that you are cool, funny, and confident.
That time spent talking to you is a gift to the other person because you are a
person of high value. You take what you want because you can, which
subconsciously lets the other person know that you are an influential person
who manifests their reality. So not only do they want to be with you, they
want to be you.

The Importance of Inner Beliefs
You have to have high and firm inner beliefs about yourself, which
means that inner work is essential to attract the opposite sex. Of course, it
helps to look good, be in good shape, be clean, shaven, well dressed, and
smell pleasant. However, even these things come very secondly to being
confident and believing in yourself. The breakdown I learned from dating
gurus in my early 20s is that looks are 30% of attraction, and the inner work
I am talking about here is the other 70%.

It is we who must give ourselves value. If we do not love ourselves
and find ourselves lacking, we will project our insecurities onto other
people, and they will perceive us as such. If we believe that we are
exceptional and unique, then subconsciously, other people will also believe
it and spend the entire time around us trying to figure out why we are so
great. This mystery will be very attractive to them.
In reality, attraction is about personal power. If you try to court a
person and are going out of your way for them, supplicating yourself, you
are communicating that you are not a person of high value, your time is not
important, and you have low personal power. If you are willing to give a
stranger your personal power willingly merely because they are attractive
physically, then you are communicating to them that you are a person of
low value, simple as that. As such, you are setting yourself up for failure
right away. Maybe, by some stroke of luck, they will want to date you, but
they will only be with you to take advantage of you in some way since you
communicated to them from the beginning that you don't respect yourself.
Subconsciously, people have no respect for individuals who do not
respect themselves. Respect is something earned, not given. Love is given
always and equally, but respect is earned. Thus, you have to learn to love
and respect yourself. If you feel that you do not love yourself as much as
you should, then examine why that is. If you have past traumas that need
healing, then focus your attention on overcoming those traumas instead of
finding a mate. You need to be in a good place before having a healthy love
relationship with someone. And that starts with loving yourself.
People who love themselves have some kind of purpose in their lives.
Their purpose is often the most important thing to them. If you don't have a
true purpose in your life right now, I suggest spending more time trying to
find or discover it. Explore new creative activities and learn new things
about yourself. Do not be afraid to change things up in your life and explore
new avenues. Break out of your comfort zone and do the things you always
wanted to do. Finding your purpose could give you everlasting joy and
happiness. It will make you love yourself and your life, which is very
attractive to other people. It will also make you know yourself better to
master those parts of Self that need work.
You are unique in every way and are a rare find. If you have not
discovered this about yourself yet, then it is time to do so. Time spent with
you is special, and other people should be so lucky that you choose to give

them your time. If you love yourself, then you will be indifferent to the
outcome of meeting someone new. Finding a romantic partner or new friend
will be a bonus in your life instead of a necessity. Indifference to the
outcome of meeting someone new will create a kind of energetic void that
the other person will feel compelled to fill. Doing so will only add to your
level of attraction.
If you have a boring life and want to meet a romantic partner, you will
have a challenging time. Being someone's entire life brings a lot of pressure
to perform and make that person happy always. Eventually, most people
give up and walk away from a relationship like that. You have to focus first
on being at peace with yourself and loving yourself because if you do not
love yourself, you will have difficulty finding someone to love you and fill
that void within yourself.
To be an Alpha, you must believe in these Principles in the deepest
corners of your Soul instead of seeing them as tactics or a form of
manipulation. If you see it like that, then inevitably, the opposite sex will
detect your behaviour as a form of manipulation, which is unattractive.
After all, people hate when someone tries to manipulate them. Instead, they
like transparency, even if it is something as direct as "I'd like to sleep with
you."
If you desire to work on yourself but lack the method of approach,
then my first book can aid you in that regard. The Magus is designed to help
you reach your highest potential as a Spiritual human being, making you
very attractive to other people. You have to learn your True Will in life and
connect with your Higher Self. If your vibration of consciousness is high,
your thoughts and emotions will be impacted, thereby affecting your
behaviour with others. Becoming the master of your reality will give you
abundance in your life, including all the romantic relationships and
friendships you desire.
Kundalini awakened people who have achieved a high level of
consciousness are liberated from this World of Matter. Their capacity to
have fun is much higher than those people who take life too seriously. We
all want joy and fun in our lives. Therefore, the more you can see meeting
new people as a fun activity, you will have more success.
The idea of having fun with the opposite sex and playing this game of
sparking attraction is a manifestation of channelling your love energy.
When you seek to attract someone instead of manipulating them, your

actions won’t carry Karmic consequences, so long as they don't have a
romantic partner. Instead, you will create good Karma for yourself when
you can create a fun conversation that someone you meet will want to
partake in willingly. Doing so will enrich your life since by creating
attraction and maintaining it, you will be bouncing love energy back and
forth with the other person and building it. As such, filling your life with
more love energy will take you further ahead on your Spiritual journey.

BECOMING A SPIRITUAL WARRIOR
Since the Spiritual journey brings a lot of Karmic shedding, you need to
develop yourself into a Spiritual warrior. You have to learn to be tough and
take on challenges head-on instead of running away from them. If you do
not, you will be broken apart by the Five Elements of your Being. The parts
of yourself which you need to conquer will overcome you instead.
As you have learned so far, Spiritual Evolution is not all fun and games;
there are times when you will be very uncomfortable in your own skin. The
concept of developing yourself into a Spiritual warrior is of such great
importance, especially while undergoing a Kundalini transformation process.
Remember, metamorphosis requires something old to die for the new to take
its place. How you conduct yourself during painful periods will make all the
difference in your life.
The Dark Night of the Soul is not a single night of mental and
emotional anguish, but it may come on many times in your life and last for
weeks, even months. Transformation requires you to be strong in the face of
adversity. Though our society often emphasizes Enlightenment being an
enjoyable experience, not very many people speak about the negative
aspects of reaching that goal and the challenges along the way.
Kundalini awakening is an awakening to the Dimension of Vibration.
This means that you can no longer hide from energies and partake only in
the positive ones while discarding the negative, as most people do. Instead,
you become a part of both, the positive and negative, concerning their effects
on your thoughts and emotions.
Most unawakened people can choose to not deal with mental and
emotional issues as they come up. They can choose to ignore negativity and
lock it up in the subconscious, which is like a vault with all the mental
"stuff" you decided not to deal with, like traumatic memories one chooses to
ignore. But with a full Kundalini awakening, that vault opens permanently
like Pandora's Box. Everything that was ever an issue in your life, including
suppressed and repressed emotions and thoughts, need to be dealt with and
overcome.
For example, traumatic memories that altered how you function in the
world have taken the form of personal Demons, which are now embedded in
your Chakras as Karmic energy that needs to be neutralized. Since each

Chakra is synonymous with one of the Five Elements, this is what I meant
when I said that you must overcome the Elements instead of allowing them
to overwhelm you. Elemental energy has to be cleansed, purified and
mastered for the vibration of your consciousness to freely rise to a higher
frequency, unhampered by lower energies.

Dealing With Positive and Negative Energies
As human beings, we naturally embrace positive energy. We can't seem
to get enough of it. We take it in, experience it, enjoy it, and seek more. And
so, we have structured our lives in such a way where we can receive positive
energy while avoiding negative energy.
Positive energy comes in many forms. Love, joy, and happiness are just
a few, but there are many more like excitement and inner peace. Conversely,
negative energy comes in the form of conflict. It almost always includes
nervousness, anxiety, and other expressions of fear energy.
Fear is an essential building block of life, and you need to learn to use
it, not be used by it. We are programmed to run from fearful situations as
much as possible since our body is on an alert, signalling that we are in
danger. However, by running from fear, you are robbing yourself of your
opportunity for growth. On the other hand, if you embrace fear, you can
learn something new about yourself that will take you further on your
Spiritual Evolution journey.
As a Kundalini awakened initiate, you will soon learn that you have
two choices in life. One, you can stay as a part of society and learn to live
with the negativity and challenges that daily life can bring, or two, you can
leave your community altogether. In the latter situation, you would discard
your material possessions and relationship ties with people in your life and
go off to live in a Temple or Ashram somewhere, entirely devoting your life
to Spiritual growth.
However, in most cases, people choose to stay in society and be a part
of the play of life. If you do this, as I have and countless others that came
before me, you will need to develop yourself into a Spiritual warrior so that
you can deal with the fear and anxiety that negative energy brings. You must
learn to put on your Spiritual armour and take up your metaphoric shield and
sword (Figure 160) to defend yourself while learning to attack. You will
need both to win the fight.

Your shield is the unconditional love in your heart (Water Element) that
can take on anything, while your sword is your willpower (Fire Element)
that cuts through all illusions to get to the truth. Your willpower is not afraid
of adversity; it welcomes it, knowing it is an opportunity for growth. Keep in
mind that even though it is more challenging to make it work as part of
regular society than to run away from it and evolve in isolation, it is far more
rewarding.
In its passive state, the Kundalini works through the Element of Water,
expressed through the feminine, Ida Nadi. Our consciousness receives
energies from the outside world, which are felt through the Mind's Eye and
experienced as emotions. As a Kundalini awakened individual, simply being
around other people brings negativity since by being an empath, you
intuitively feel the darkness of people's Souls. But if you work on
developing yourself into a Spiritual warrior, you will embrace the challenge
of fitting in and making it work in modern-day society.
In most instances, what bothers us about other people is what we carry
in ourselves. So, by developing yourself into a Spiritual warrior and
overcoming those things, you will find that you will no longer see those
things in others, at least not in a way where you can't be around them. So, in
this way, other people's negativity can be an asset to you and a catalyst for
growth.

Figure 160: Becoming a Spiritual Warrior

Building up Your Willpower
You must build up your willpower using the Fire aspect of the
Kundalini energy, which is channelled through the Pingala Nadi. Of course,
it helps if you are already someone who deals with people and difficult
situations with a certain degree of ease. However, when you can feel
people’s negativity in real-time, it is a much more challenging situation that
has its own learning curve, especially at the beginning point of your
transformation journey, when your emotions have precedence. In any event,
all initiates must begin their journey of becoming a Spiritual Warrior by
learning how to neutralize the negative energy that life's events and the
people around them can bring.
Willpower is like a muscle, and you must treat it as such. If you work
out this muscle daily, it becomes stronger and more powerful. The
foundation of your willpower grows with time, and it becomes more difficult
to get taken off course through negativity experienced by way of outside
influence. Fire (willpower) always dominates over Water (emotions) once
applied correctly. This concept is crucial to understand. Energy is a blind
force, as is emotion. Energy is passive and is experienced inside the Aura as
a feeling. You can manipulate this feeling with the proper application of
willpower.
At first, you will find yourself moved around by your emotions like a
passenger in a boat at sea. But with daily practice, you will overcome your
anxiety and fear and be able to use your Demons constructively instead of
allowing them to rule you. This is not easy to master within the Self and is
perhaps the biggest challenge for any Kundalini awakened initiate. But it can
be achieved. And it must if you are to maximize your Spiritual potential.
You have incredible power inside of you now, but you must learn to
tame it and use it productively in your life. You must overcome your fears
and Demons by conquering your Lower Self, the Ego. Only then can you be
Resurrected Spiritually and align your consciousness with your Higher Self.

To Change Your Mood, Change Your State
How you apply your mind and what type and quality of thoughts you
choose to listen to you will determine your success in this endeavour. Your
negative emotions will either overcome you or you will neutralize them;

these are your two choices. Therefore, if you are experiencing a negative
emotional state, it is crucial to treat it like blind energy that can be subdued
with the application of your willpower. To achieve this, apply The
Kybalion's Principle of Mental Gender and focus on the opposite pole of the
emotion you are trying to change within yourself. This will allow you to
alter its vibration and turn it from a negative pole into a positive one.
This method is called "Mental Transmutation," and it is a very powerful
technique of taking control over your reality and not being a slave to your
emotions. I have used this Principle my entire life, and it has been one of the
primary keys in my success with mental mastery. The way it works is
simple: if you are experiencing fear, concentrate on courage; if you are full
of hate and want to induce love, then focus on it instead. And so on with
different expressions of opposite emotions.
Learn to speak positively to yourself instead of being self-defeating.
Don't say that you can't do something; instead, tell yourself that you can.
Never allow yourself to get down and admit defeat. Instead, shift your mind
to focus on the positive of a situation, like seeing it as a learning lesson that
will help you grow as a person. Don’t dwell on your negative emotions or
mind-state but be proactive and willfully and willingly concentrate on
cultivating its opposite. It helps to remember an instance in your life when
you felt that positive emotion you are trying to induce in yourself. As you
hold its memory in your mind, it will begin to affect the negative feeling and
start transforming it into a positive one. To change your mood, you must
change your state. Never forget this. Failure is a choice.
Another method of overcoming negative emotions is to shift your mind
into an active state by engaging in an inspirational activity. Remember, to be
inspired, you must be in-Spirit. An act of inspiration involves being in tune
with the Spirit energy, which positively affects your consciousness. To
become inspired, you can also engage in physical activity, transforming the
negative emotion by increasing the Fire Element within the body.
Another method of being in-Spirit is to directly tune into the mind,
bypassing the body, and engage in some creative activity which will involve
the Fire Element as well as the imagination (Air Element), slowly shifting
the energy from negative to positive. To create is to attune to positivity in
oneself since you need love energy to create. Some physical activities that
are essential in building up willpower are walking, running, doing Yoga

(Asanas), playing sports, or dancing. Creative activities include painting,
singing, and writing.
Building up the willpower is not an easy task, and it takes many years
to overcome fear and anxiety after awakening Kundalini. But if you apply
yourself and take baby steps daily to accomplish this task, you will develop
yourself into a true Spiritual Warrior that can deal with all life situations in a
relaxed and calm manner. By working towards this goal, the love energy
which you carry in your heart will expand until it overcomes you and takes
you over entirely. Love is the key to this process; the love of oneself and
love of other people.

THE POWER OF LOVE
Love transmutes/transforms any negatively charged emotion or
thought into a positive one. Creating and using your imagination is also an
act of love. Love energy powers your creative process which is required to
see alternate ways of perceiving your mind's content. Positive thoughts and
emotions can only be induced by love. By applying the energy of love to a
negative, fear-based emotion or thought, you are changing its form and
substance. Love acts as the force of fusion between two opposing ideas,
completely neutralizing and removing fear, the driving force behind all
negative thoughts.
At the Crown Chakra, this process is voluntary and continuous. Hence,
the Crown is considered the ultimate in consciousness and void of Ego.
Fear exists only on the mental level where duality occurs. It can be likened
to False Evidence Appearing Real (FEAR). In other words, fear results
from a lack of understanding or an improper interpretation of events.
The only way to interpret an event is through love. Lack of love
creates fear, which produces Karma since Karma exists as a safeguard for
the Spiritual Plane. Karma is the result of memories of events improperly
interpreted due to lack of understanding, creating division between the Self
and the rest of the world. This division generates fear. However, if you take
away the fear, you are left with unity, which breeds faith. Through faith,
you will find love, which is the ultimate in human understanding.
By learning to operate through unconditional love, you Spiritualize the
Heart Chakra, which allows your consciousness to elevate into the Spiritual
Plane to experience the higher three Chakras of Vishuddhi, Ajna, and
Sahasrara. This state creates a rapture in the heart, manifesting the Kingdom
of Heaven spoken about by Jesus Christ. When achieved, you sit at the right
hand of God and are a King or Queen in Heaven, metaphorically speaking.
This is the esoteric interpretation of Jesus Christ's teachings. It is no
coincidence that he was always symbolically depicted with a burning heart
and a halo around his head. Jesus completed the Kundalini awakening
process and came to tell others of it, although he conveyed his teachings in
cryptic parables so that only the worthy could understand. Jesus knew never
to cast "pearls before swine," which was the traditional method of passing

down Spiritual and esoteric teachings in the olden days. As The Kybalion
says, "The lips of wisdom are closed, except to the ears of understanding."
In this Universe, all things evolve and resolve back to where they
originated from. Since our Universe was created by love and everything is
an aspect of it, love is also the unifying factor in all things and their endproduct. By maintaining a loving attitude in your heart, you are silencing
other parts of your mind that create chaos and imbalance. Love silences the
Ego and centres you so that you are in touch with your Soul and Higher
Self. Because of its power of transformation, love is portrayed as fire
symbolically, since the Fire Element consecrates and purifies all things,
bringing them back to their original, pure state.
In the same way, because of its Universal power, all things bow down
to love. That means that once you apply love to any action, other people
will respond in kind. Love demands respect. It speaks the truth, and it
compels others to do the same. Love is the Law of the Universe, especially
when it is consciously applied. As such, love needs to be under the
governance of the will.
There would be no need for governments and policing if all people
awakened their Kundalini energy. It would activate people's higher virtues,
and since love would be the guiding force behind all their actions, problems
between people would cease to exist. Fighting and division would end, and
the world would balance itself. It is no wonder that all Spiritual people say
that the highest manifestation of God on our Plane of existence is love.
Think about the many instances in the past where a famous poet,
musician or artist had their heart "broken." In their hurt feelings, they turned
towards expressing through the creative activity that they were masters at.
And in doing so, they healed themselves. Love is the ultimate healer of all
pain and suffering. And Fire is the absolute transformative Element used to
transform the negative energy of fear and anxiety into pure love.

Love and the Principle of Polarity
To understand how energy works psychologically, you must
understand the concept of a dark room and what happens when you allow
Light inside. You can spend an Eternity focusing on the dark and trying to
expel it from the room, or you can simply open up a window to bring in the
Light.

The idea behind this metaphor is to focus on the opposite of that which
you are trying to overcome within yourself. To do so, you must use the
Hermetic Principle of Polarity, which is present in all things. It states that
everything in nature is dual and has two poles or extremes that are different
in degree but made of the same substance. This Principle implies that all
truths are half-truths and that all paradoxes can be reconciled.
You will find that love energy, in one of its various forms, is the
opposite of any negative thought or idea you will ever encounter in life. For
example, if one lies, they will have turned to Self-hate, and if they apply
love to this equation, they will speak the truth. To speak the truth is to love
yourself and others. Truth is an aspect of love. If one is angry and violent,
they must use an aspect of love and apply temperance, which will give them
humility, and in turn, they will overcome their anger. If one is greedy, they
will need to use love energy and apply it to become charitable and give to
others as they do to themselves.
The notion of the seven deadly sins of lust, gluttony, greed, sloth,
wrath, envy and pride are at the basis of most of negative thoughts,
emotions and beliefs. Applying love energy turns these negative states into
positive ones, which are chastity, temperance, charity, diligence, patience,
kindness, and humility.
Fear is the opposite of love, and the seven deadly sins are based on
different aspects or manifestations of fear. In most cases, it is fear energy
that is motivated by the survival instinct whereby the person disassociates
themselves from the rest of the world and individualizes and isolates
themselves psychologically. The concept here is to take care of yourself, but
in the case of the seven deadly sins, this concept does so without due
respect to other people.
Putting yourself before other people and with disregard to them creates
a lack of equality and balance. Doing so is an act of Self-love, instead of
Universal love that liberates us. By operating from Self-love, you act from
the Ego. Operating from the Ego isolates you from the rest of the world and
takes away the channel of love, which is necessary to be truly happy,
joyous, and content with yourself and your life.

The Ego and the Higher Self
It is challenging to distinguish between the Ego and the Higher Self,
especially if you are in a conflict with someone and the heat of the moment.

I always like to ask myself the following few questions before responding
to a dispute, "How does what I am about to say or do affect the big picture?
Positively or negatively? Will it help or harm the situation?" In other words,
"Will the situation be resolved, or get complicated further? If what I am
about to say or do only helps me while harming others, which is often an
instinctual response, it comes from the Ego. On the other hand, if it
positively affects a situation and potentially resolves it, even if it will harm
my pride, then it is of the Higher Self, and I should proceed with it.
The Universe makes the formula very simple. If our actions or
statements in life will cause a positive change in other people's lives, it will
activate the love principle, and we will attain unity. Selfless actions are
most favourable for our Spiritual Evolution as they create positive Karma
while inducing bliss. However, selfish actions directed towards only
tending to your needs and desires, with disregard for other people, attach
negative Karmic energy to your Aura and bind the Ego further to your
consciousness. Being selfish in word or deed always yields toxic fruits that
make the illusion of Self greater. Remember, the greatest con the Ego pulled
is making you believe it is you. So don't fall for it.
The more you help others, and the less you focus on yourself, the more
love and unity you will feel with all things. However, doing so is not only
confusing for the Ego, but it is counterintuitive. As such, the Ego will
always try to sway you in the opposite direction. But if you proceed with an
action or statement that triggers the love principle, even if it compromises
the Ego, you will align with your Higher Self so you can experience bliss.
In many instances, though, you will have to believe it before you see it
because the Ego is faithless by nature, which is why it can't see the big
picture.
To truly prioritize your Spiritual Evolution, you must start taking full
responsibility for your actions, including conflicts in your life. Stop
blaming others but understand that it takes "two to tango." Being the first to
apologize doesn't make you weak, but it shows that you are taking
accountability for your part in the conflict. Subconsciously, this lets the
other person know they need to do the same.
Conversely, if you continue being defensive, they will return the
favour, and nothing will get resolved. The conflict will continue to escalate,
keeping your love energy with that person severed and even jeopardizing
your relationship. People tend to mirror each other’s behaviour, especially

during conflict. Therefore, be careful with your actions and statements
because what you put in, you get back.
By developing yourself into a Spiritual Warrior, an emissary of Godthe Creator, you work on expanding your capacity to love unconditionally.
First, you must learn to love and respect yourself, your Higher Self, and
then apply that same amount of love to other people. Consequently, by
showing love to other people, you show love to your Higher Self, and vice
versa. You must remodel your character and personality by developing
ethics and morals that seek unity instead of division. In doing this, you will
distance yourself from your Ego, allowing a complete transfiguration of
mind, body, and Soul to take place that can bring everlasting happiness to
your life.

BEING A CO-CREATOR OF YOUR
REALITY
Many people experience tremendous challenges on the mental and
emotional level after a Kundalini awakening. After the influx of Light
energy and becoming attuned to the Dimension of Vibration, one can no
longer close themselves off from the outside world, but their consciousness
is open to it 24/7. As this happens, the individual might perceive the
Kundalini energy as something foreign that is not a part of them, yet it
controls their life. For example, many awakened individuals say they feel
possessed by this energy and that a complete surrender to it is the correct
answer. However, the Kundalini energy is passive since it is the feminine
energy of the Goddess Shakti. This Life energy requires us to be active
participants in the process of Creation since all passive energies need a
catalyst to set them into motion.
The heart is the motivating principle, the first impulse that receives its
impetus from the willpower, the Fire of the Soul. If willpower is
continuously being used, it energises the heart, moving the mind, and the
body follows. After a full Kundalini awakening, the optimised energy
system operates as a blind force until willpower controls it. Since willpower
is masculine, it acts on the feminine energy of the Kundalini, animating it
and making it move in the desired direction.
Indeed, the Kundalini is feminine energy, representing creativity,
imagination and all parts of the Self, representing the negative, passive
energy current. On this note, understand that negative and positive energy
currents have nothing to do with good or bad but are concerned with
projection and reception—masculine energy projects, while feminine
energy receives. Since a Kundalini awakening is a complete process of
transformation, it involves not just the feminine aspect of the Self but also
the masculine. It challenges you to use your newfound expanded masculine
energy by using your willpower, which allows you to be in charge of your
reality at all times.
It is crucial for you to actively control the workings of the mind, which
will, in turn, influence and control the body. The precursor of all action is

thought, while the progenitor of thoughts is willpower. Willpower is at the
core of all things. Thus, being a Co-creator with the Creator is the
substantial challenge of the Kundalini transformation, one that you need to
start overcoming daily.
We are on Planet Earth to manifest whatever reality we desire, and it is
a gift from our Creator to have this ability. However, if we don't use this
ability to our fullest potential, we will suffer emotionally and mentally. And
more so, if we do not use our willpower to control our reality, we will
invariably be influenced by others who will do our thinking for us.
Therefore, there is no other way to live than to take full responsibility for
your own life.
Also, if the body is unmoved by the mind, you will fall prey to the
workings of the Ego, which is an intelligence apart from the Soul and Spirit
that seemingly runs on automatic. The Ego is linked with the survival of the
physical body, operating through the passive element of Water. If your
willpower is not active, you will constantly be under the control of the body
and the Ego. Willpower is a muscle that requires training, which can be
challenging to work with but rewarding beyond measure. The blind energy
of the Kundalini should not animate the body without the willpower being
present and in use since that implies external factors are its catalyst. Instead,
willpower should control the Kundalini energy, which then impacts the
mind, setting the body in motion.
Mind over Matter is a false statement. It is heart over mind, impacting
Matter. The heart comes first since willpower operates through it. The mind
is merely a blind medium between the body and the heart. If it does not
receive impressions from willpower, it will welcome ideas from the wills of
others, and there will no longer be control of the Kundalini energy. Instead,
the mind will be the one in control. People get this part wrong. They
sometimes act like the Kundalini is something external to the Self that
needs to be listened to and followed while forgetting the overall purpose of
the Kundalini awakening.
Kundalini is an awakening of the Spiritual Self, the heart, and the
willpower of the True Self, which now can pour into the body and control it
through the mind. Before this can be achieved, though, much work has to
be done on the interior. You have to train yourself to combat the outside
world's negativity and overcome it. The outside world, including people and

the environment, constantly creates negativity that projects into your Aura,
detrimentally affecting your energy field.
The more significant challenge past awakening the Kundalini is daily
learning to live with the energy. You must understand the ins and outs of
living with this energy and control it instead of being controlled by it. The
Kybalion's Principle of Mental Gender comes into play when undergoing a
Kundalini transformation which states that the feminine and masculine
components of the Universe are present within the mind as well. If you
don't use your willpower, your energies will be driven by external factors
like other people's willpower. This Principle or Law of the Universe cannot
be overcome or destroyed. Instead, it needs to be respected and applied.
Free Will is a gift and one that requires our utmost attention. After all, in the
words of Voltaire, "With great power comes great responsibility." And if
you want to wield great power and be a catalyst for change, hard inner work
is required for success.

Manifesting Your Destiny
To manifest the life you always dreamed for yourself, you will have no
choice but to align with your willpower and learn to use it. But, on the other
hand, laziness and failure to implement your willpower will result in
stagnation or devolution in every case. Also, it will turn your life into
chaos, where you become the Moon of other people's Suns, instead of being
your own Sun, the centre of your Solar System. In other words, other
people will be in charge of your reality since your attention will be on
pleasing them instead of yourself.
You have to understand that you need to love yourself first before you
can healthily love others. And showing yourself love means that you must
make your own decisions in life and guide your path. You must put all of
your trust and faith in yourself and know that you are a gift to this world.
You are unique, even if you must believe this blindly before seeing it
manifest. Other people can give you advice that you should weigh with
critical thinking and discernment, but every decision you make has to be
yours.
One of life's great mysteries is that we are meant to be Co-Creators
with our Creator. We are not destined to be mere reflections of other
people's realities. With God in our hearts, we can live our dreams, and by

doing so, we will help the collective evolution of humanity. Human beings
are intrinsically good, but belief in oneself is of prime importance if you are
to overcome your Ego and align with your Higher Self. You see, most
people are not seeking the meaning of life but feeling the raw excitement of
being alive. We all want to live in the moment and taste the fruits of the
Eternal Spirit, which is our birthright.
To start manifesting your destiny, you must let go of all limiting beliefs
that have allowed you to be content with a mediocre life. You are not your
past conditioning, and in every waking moment, you have the power of
your will to remake yourself entirely. You have Free Will, but you have to
learn to exercise it and use it productively. Then, you can be the hero of
your own story if you choose to be. It is a lot of responsibility, but the level
of power one has is counterbalanced by how much responsibility they must
take on.
By learning not to fear change, you can fulfil your Soul's desires and
be happy. However, first, you must embrace your God-given right to be a
Co-Creator of your life. Lazy, unmotivated people sit idly by and let life
pass them by, harbouring some false belief about what destiny is. They have
forfeited their willpower and are under the pretence that whatever is meant
to happen will happen. But in reality, if you don't make something happen,
it will not happen. It is as simple as that.
If you continuously hope and pray to win the lottery, but you did not
even buy a lottery ticket, how do you expect to win? Many people I have
come across have this viewpoint. They want to believe that it is just a
matter of time before the Universe rewards them for their "hardships," but
they are doing absolutely nothing to be the catalyst for change in their lives.
They believe that their position and conditions in their life result from
external factors and that everything is "meant to be." These people take zero
responsibility for their reality and act like victims to everything life throws
their way. They have found solace in this victimization process, and instead
of snapping out of it and taking control, they blame others and the Universe
itself that they aren't happy with their lives.
The above viewpoint is erroneous at its core. Understand that the
Universe is a vessel of blind energy that requires the use of our Free Will to
enact change. Without using your willpower, things will remain as they are,
allowing the Ego to have complete control over your life. And the Ego
wants to pleasure the body at any given moment; it has no concern for the

future. Remember always that the Universe wants to give you what you
want. If you choose to be lazy, the Universe will provide you with the
ramifications of that action. However, if you take accountability for your
life and make changes, the Universe will reward you.
Expect that the Universe will complete whatever thoughts and desires
you project into the Astral World, so be careful what you think about and
wish for. This Universal Principle that forms the Law of Attraction needs to
be used with precision and great responsibility. You will suffer if you use it
haphazardly since nothing manifests by chance. Everything that manifested
in your life is a result of you magnetizing the Astral World with your
thoughts. You asked to be where you are in life, whether consciously or
subconsciously. Until you realize this, you will not progress further. If you
let other people do your thinking for you, they take control of your reality
while you are simply a passenger on your journey, which is sorrowful to
your Creator. God wants you to be a winner in life, not a loser to whom
things simply happen without their conscious control.
Nobody, including your parents and loved ones, can tell you how to
live your life. Only you can decide that for yourself. And it is your
responsibility to allow yourself to figure that out. You can achieve any goals
and dreams if you apply the right energy into manifesting them while being
determined, persistent and downright stubborn to make them come true. If
you listen to others tell you what you should be doing, then you have failed
yourself and your Creator.
The path of the Kundalini initiate is the path of a Spiritual warrior.
Spiritual advancement requires the active participation of the Self with the
Universe, which involves playing the role of a Co-Creator in this reality.
This Spiritual path is not about becoming just a King or Queen of Heaven.
It requires that you become a King or Queen of Hell first. In other words,
you must learn to deal with negativity and master it. You must master all
parts of the Self that prevent you from being the best version of yourself.
You must invoke courage and face your fears and overcome them while
learning to listen to the voice in your head that inspires you to live in Light
and truth.
Fully Kundalini awakened individuals in touch with the world of
energy are constantly receiving positive and negative energy influences
externally and internally. They are fully open to the forces of Light but also
Darkness. Living with an awakened Kundalini is far more challenging than

living without one because it requires you to embrace this new reality and
make use of your new powers. It requires you to use your Free Will
Principle at a higher level than before. You must motivate yourself and
search for answers within instead of looking outwards for answers. You
must be your own Saviour, instead of waiting for some Deity to come down
from the Heavens to save you.
As a Kundalini awakening is a full activation of the Heart Chakra, it is
essential to note that the heart becomes the guiding force in your life. The
heart is the Ego's opposite. The Ego seeks to satisfy the physical body while
the heart is expressive of the Soul and Spirit. Therefore, learning to live
renewed from the heart centre and using your willpower at all times is one
of the greatest challenges of all but one that yields the most incredible fruits
if mastered.

Work and School Life
One of the significant challenges of the Kundalini awakening and
transformation process is performing at work or in school. I am targeting
work and school here since I am talking about the nine to five obligations
we put forth to maintain a healthy lifestyle. You need money to survive in
modern-day society; therefore, I guess you will have had some daily job
that sustains you financially. On the other hand, if you are at a young age
and are just starting your life, then maybe you are not working full-time yet,
and you are in school, as I was when I first had the Kundalini awakening.
Or perhaps you are juggling both work and school, and you were graced
with the Kundalini awakening, either a spontaneous one or a consciously
induced one.
Whatever the case, if you have chosen to tough it out at work and (or)
stay in school, life will meet you with particular challenges along the way. I
have already talked about this briefly but feel the need to get into more
detail on this topic. Firstly, you will have experiences nightly when the
Kundalini energy is very active, and you cannot induce sleep to be fully
rested in the morning. This situation is something you will have to adjust to
early on. You cannot change it but can only adapt to it.
My advice is to learn to relax as much as possible. Find a sleeping
position that works best for you. If you are sleeping on your side, then
chances are you will go into a deeper sleep than if you lie on your back. If
you lie on your back, your body is in a meditative state, and most often, this

will result in an Out-of-Body Experience and a Lucid Dream. Lucid
Dreams are fun and exciting, but they will not give you the deep sleep you
need if the focus is to be as rested as possible in the morning so you can
take on your nine to five. Remember, Lucid Dreams occur in the Alpha
State when the consciousness is neither fully asleep nor fully awake. It is
often accompanied by REM sleep which means "Rapid Eye Movement." In
REM, your eyes are rolling to the back of your head while you are sleeping.
It is not dangerous to be in REM mode, but it can be taxing and strenuous
on your physical body.
While you are at work or in school, you may not be feeling the most
balanced emotionally or mentally some days, which may result in you
having an "episode" in front of co-workers or peers. It is best to get yourself
into a different mindset while you are at work or in school if you want to
remain incognito to others. Reserve your emotions for when you are alone
or have a family member or a special friend you can confide in.
Having an emotional episode in front of people you can't trust will
jeopardise your job. I remember many instances when I had to remain calm
in front of my boss or professor at school to preserve my work or school
integrity. It is challenging to deal with authority figures while undergoing a
Kundalini transformation since they will not understand what you are going
through, yet their job is to keep you in line. As I mentioned before, it helps
to have acceptable excuses on hand, and often you will have no choice but
to lie about your situation so that you can get a pass.
Feeling alienated due to the condition you are in will make your life
far more complicated than if you tell a lie. It helps to make friends at work
or school since you will sometimes need them to cover for you. Try extra
hard with these people always, since they will be of great use to you in
certain situations. I remember having close friends in school that would
sign me into morning classes when I could not make it on time due to being
unable to sleep the night before. This situation happened to me many times.
It also happened that if I were feeling down and moody, my co-workers
would cover for me with excuses for my boss, whose job is always to
evaluate his employees' work performance.
Remember, most people will not understand what you are going
through, but friends and family can accept that you need help sometimes
with whatever you believe is happening to you. People that love you will
show understanding and offer assistance even though they might not fully

comprehend your situation. Therefore, don't write people off in your life
entirely just because they can't relate to your situation. A true friend does
not judge you but shows you love when you need it. Dealing with a
Kundalini transformation, you will see who your real friends are.

Inspiration and Music
People often ask me to tell them how a Kundalini awakening improves
their everyday lives. Although this is an evolutionary mechanism that can
vault you into another state of reality, the practical change effect is that it
makes you inspired. Being inspired implies that you are in-Spirit and not in
the Ego. You are functioning at a higher state of reality where anything
feels possible. By connecting to the ineffable, Eternal, unlimited Spirit
energy, you can explore the true potential of life.
The Spiritual Realm is a place of pure power and infinite possibility.
You can only access it through the Now, the present moment. A Kundalini
awakening triggers this state within you. Once the Kundalini circuit is open
and optimized, nourishing itself with every morsel of food, it activates a
continuous process of inspiration.
Sure, you will oscillate between Ego and Spirit as you prioritize tasks
in your life since you still have to deal with its mundane aspects. However,
it will be accompanied by this perpetual movement of Kundalini energy
within you that is the source of unlimited inspiration. It creates a sense of
wonder and innocence, the same as you'd see in a child who has not
developed an Ego yet. It is beautiful and breathtaking every moment of
every day, especially once you have reached the point in evolution when
you can see Light in all things, as I described previously.
You see, the Kundalini is our way back to the Source of all Creation.
When we achieve this state of consciousness, life activities become
effortless. The pain and anxiety of human life, including mental and
emotional suffering, is replaced by inspiration, fulfilment, inner peace, and
lasting happiness. The joy that one experiences in their heart and the rapture
that comes with it is unbound. Indeed, to live fully as Spiritual human
beings and get the most out of life, we need to be inspired. And a Kundalini
awakening gives us this.
Many times in my life, I have found myself in such ecstatic states that
I needed to clench my teeth to ground the feeling as the Kundalini energy
coursed through me. I often experienced the most intense inspirational

states simply by listening to music. Your taste in music determines the kind
of emotion you will experience since all music seeks to create some feeling
in you. My favourite type of music and the one I find my Kundalini energy
most amplified is epic movie music. This includes movie music from
composers like Hans Zimmer, who did the soundtracks for The Dark Knight
Trilogy, The Last Samurai, Gladiator, The Rock, Thin Red Line, King
Arthur, Dune, Man of Steel, Inception, Interstellar, and many more.
Inspiring movies that take your mind and heart on an emotional
journey generally deal with higher consciousness themes. Themes of
honour, loyalty, respect, and mystical wonder are among my favourites
since they tap into the deeper parts of my Soul that the Kundalini
transformation has awakened. These themes and epic movie music inspire
me and keep me in very high states throughout the day, enabling me to
write, draw, and otherwise tap into my expanded creativity.
I listen to music every single day, sometimes for hours on end. Doing
so puts me in an inspirational state of mind where it feels like whatever I
am listening to is the soundtrack to whatever task I'm doing. For example,
driving and listening to epic movie music feels like whatever song I am
playing is part of the soundtrack to my life. I have found music to be the
most significant source of inspiration on my Kundalini journey, and I am so
grateful for being part of a society with so many amazing musicians and
composers present.

PART X:
KUNDALINI DAMAGE-CONTROL

KUNDALINI AND SHORT-CIRCUITS
As you are going through the Kundalini awakening process and
integrating the energy within yourself, you will likely encounter some
pitfalls which can happen as a result of either Ida or Pingala shortcircuiting. In speaking to many other Kundalini awakened individuals over
social media and in person, I have discovered that these "short circuits" are
a common issue. However, most people are unaware that they can reconnect
the Ida and Pingala channels to create a proper energy flow in the head
again. I call this process "Kundalini Manual Restart." You can restart the
system manually with meditation exercises that I discovered instead of just
waiting for the Universe to help you.
Sushumna can never short circuit as its energy flow is through the
hollow tube of the spinal column, and it is connected to the centre of the
brain, the Third Ventricle area containing the Thalamus, Hypothalamus, and
the Pineal and Pituitary Glands. As Sushumna reaches the brain's centre, its
energy spreads outwards like tentacles to the outer parts of the brain and the
head. But Ida and Pingala, as they are ancillary channels or Nadis, regulate
the mind, body and Soul and are affected by thoughts and emotions. To be
exact, Ida governs the emotions, while Pingala controls the willpower. Ida
is expressive of the Water Element, while Pingala is expressive of the Fire
Element. It is common for them to short-circuit if the quality of thoughts
and feelings within becomes intensely corrupted.
Over the years, I have found myself in this situation many times.
Overbearing anxiety about the future, a fear-ridden mind, inability to think
clearly, or obsession with past events are typical thoughts or emotions that
can substantially hinder the Kundalini system. They go against the Spirit
and take one out of the Now, the present moment, completely shutting
down one's source of inspiration, the Crown.
Kundalini short-circuits usually occur due to a fear-based thought or
emotion overtaking the mind for an extended period. Common examples
include the end of a loving romantic relationship, loved ones passing away,
intense pressure at work or school, etc. The less common events include
being raped, kidnapped, witnessing a murder, or other traumatic situations
where your life is in jeopardy. In all of these examples of potential life

events, some less bad or gruesome than others, the common thread is
triggering stress and anxiety that overtakes the mind, body, and Soul.
When events like this occur, your body is in "fight or flight" mode
with the Sympathetic Nervous System in full gear. The Ego clings to
negative thoughts with all its might, trying to work them out internally. As
such, your consciousness is taken out of the Spirit Element and the higher
Chakras, making you lose connection with the transcendence factor.
Depending on the duration of stress and anxiety, the Ego can quickly
overtake the Higher Self during this time, putting either Ida, Pingala or both
of the channels in jeopardy. If you somehow can snap out of this state in
time, you can avoid a short-circuit, but this is all dependent on what you
focus your attention on for the next little while.
What is most common is a short circuit in Ida, the feminine channel,
which occurs due to the emotions being overtaken with fear energy. Ida is
passive, as are the feelings. Recall that if all three channels are working
correctly, the Spirit energy becomes released within the Self, permeating the
Body of Light and resulting in a Nirvanic rapture. While in this state, one
does not think in terms of past or future. Instead, they exist in the Now,
bringing about the mystical transcendence I mentioned.
When you are taken over by something emotionally challenging in the
present moment that brings with it a high degree of fear energy, you are
immediately taken out of this transcendental state. If the negative emotion
is powerful enough, it can collapse the Ida channel. This would mean that
you will lose touch with the transcendence in the emotions, making your
natural state negatively charged. As such, your capacity to experience fear
will be tremendously heightened.
Remember what I said many times before: the highest state of the
Kundalini awakened consciousness is one where duality is transcended,
including the experience of fear. A fully Kundalini awakened individual is
meant to overcome fear altogether. However, unless you live in a Temple or
Ashram somewhere and are away from the unpredictability and chaos of
modern-day society, you will invariably encounter life events that get you
back in touch with fear. How you deal with these events depends on
whether you will preserve the integrity of the Kundalini system or things
will fall out of balance.
Since Pingala is related to how you express your willpower, it can also
collapse due to inactivity and not following your True Will. If this happens,

you no longer receive an influx of the Fire Element. You may have
transcendence in your emotions, but you will lack the inspiration. The
necessary surge of masculine energy you need to strive in life will be gone
for the time being. You will become stagnant in your life's journey and not
accomplish much at all.
On the other hand, there is no goal too high and no task too difficult
when Pingala is fully active. Pingala is less likely to short circuit as long as
you follow your Spiritual path and act consistently with your willpower. Ida
and Pingala are supposed to balance each other out when functioning
correctly. The transcendence in the emotions, coupled with continual
inspiration, should make you feel like a Demi-God who can accomplish
anything you set your mind to. Every waking moment is a rapture, and you
are the cause and effect, the question and answer in one—the Alpha and the
Omega. The Spirit is continually feeding your Soul, and your Higher Self
directly communicates with you.
A typical example of how Pingala can short-circuit is in an unhealthy
or toxic situation, such as a co-dependent romantic or parental relationship
where other people do your thinking for you. Anything that affects your
Free Will and your God-given right to make your own decisions in life
affects how the Pingala channel functions. Therefore, it is of crucial
importance to continually generate your own reality through the use of your
willpower. That being said, it usually takes a little while for Pingala to be
put in jeopardy. It is more related to your beliefs in life, as is the nature of
the Fire Element. Emotions are instantaneous, so Ida is more often in
jeopardy.
Sushumna cannot ever short circuit since to do so would be to drop
your Kundalini energy entirely and have it not function at all, and I have
never heard of this happening. I believe once it is open, it is open for life
and the hollow tube of the spinal column carries this energy from the
coccyx, the tailbone, to the centre of the brain. Perhaps the only possible
way it can ever stop working is with some serious spinal cord injury. Still, I
have never heard of that happening to anyone, so I am merely speculating.
Since the Sushumna channel releases Kundalini energy into the brain,
which then spreads outwards, the central connecting part from the brain's
centre to the very top of the head right above it is the primary channel or
current of Sushumna. It is the thickest in terms of the Kundalini strands that
come together to create this channel. Kundalini strands are likened to

spaghetti, although even thinner. They are the Nadis that spread outwards
from the energetic centres, the Chakras, and the three primary Nadis that
terminate in the head. In this way, these strands of Kundalini energy reach
the surface of the head, trunk, and limbs. They look like tree branches that
carry Kundalini energy through the Body of Light on the inside.
There are more Kundalini strands in the head than anywhere else in the
body. After all, the head and brain are the "command centre," the
headquarters that regulate all of the mind's processes. The heart, though,
governs the operations of the Soul. But the heart expresses through the
mind. Therefore, the mind is the medium of expression for the Soul and
Spirit. As mentioned, the Heart Chakra, Anahata, is another critical energy
centre in the body where most of these Nadis converge and branch out
from. So now you can see why the Hermetic Axiom of "All is Mind, the
Universe is Mental" is the backbone of all Hermetic philosophy. Our minds
are the connecting links between Spirit and Matter. And the mind expresses
through the brain, which is the Central Nervous System of the body, along
with the spine.
The Sushumna channel can never short circuit, but the connection
from the brain to the top of the head can. It does not happen as often as
short-circuiting Ida and Pingala, but it can and does happen. It usually
happens if Ida, as well as Pingala, are collapsed at the same time. It can also
occur if you focus your willpower on thinking internally too much. You put
your attention on your subconscious by doing so, pulling the energy
towards the back of the head instead of upwards.
We are meant to focus our energies to the front of the head, into Ajna
Chakra, corresponding with our natural, waking state. And by focusing on
the Third Eye, we create a link with Sahasrara above. Therefore, obsession
and obsessive thoughts can be very detrimental to the energy flow within
the brain and can create blockages. Proper alignment to the top centre of the
head is necessary to attain the state of transcendence since the Crown
represents Oneness. Any unbalanced thoughts then or improper use of
willpower compromises the entire Kundalini system since its purpose is to
keep you in the present, the Now, in a constant feeling of inspiration.

KUNDALINI AND RECREATIONAL DRUGS
Substance use and abuse is an essential topic within Kundalini circles
that is often overlooked because of its taboo factor. Regardless, this topic
needs to be brought to Light because many individuals turn to recreational
drugs, including alcohol, at some point on their journey to help them cope
with the mental and emotional issues that ensue following a Spiritual
awakening. I was one of those people many years ago, so this topic is dear to
me because of my own experiences and my desire to share them with others
in an informative way.
After being predisposed to a wild, socially active lifestyle, I went
through the crux of my Kundalini transformation in my mid-20s. Being
someone who always believed in living life to its fullest and without regrets,
I experimented with recreational drugs and alcohol even before awakening
Kundalini. I was more of an enhancement user, though, who used substances
to connect me to the Spiritual reality instead of someone who did it to numb
the emotional pain of undesired events in life.
However, after the awakening, I started using cannabis to help alleviate
the tremendous fear and anxiety that permanently became a part of me. And
so, I experimented with different strains of cannabis for the next dozen years
of my life. Through experience came the wisdom and knowledge of the
science of recreational drugs and alcohol so that when I turned my back on
both later on in my life, I knew exactly why I was doing it—I knew what I
was losing and what I was gaining in the process.
I believe in full transparency on this topic so that you can understand
the real repercussions of substance use and abuse. After all, Kundalini
awakened individuals in a North American society live a much different
lifestyle than awakened individuals in India or other parts of the world. We
all want to "fit in" and be "cool" and accepted by our peers. And ones that
don't have a much rougher ride than ones that do.
From speaking to many Kundalini awakened people over social media
and in person, I concluded that most have experimented with drugs and
alcohol at some point in their lives and that it's a common theme. Therefore,
completely disregarding this topic is unrealistic and leaves you open to
harm. Instead, understanding the science behind recreational drugs and
alcohol when applied to the Kundalini system will enable you to make a

conscious decision about their use on your awakening journey. You will also
know what to do when you have gone too far with their use and have put the
integrity of the Kundalini system in jeopardy.

Cannabis and its Properties
Cannabis is the most popular recreational drug globally and always has
been. Consequently, Kundalini awakened individuals are prone to
experimenting with it and even making it a part of their Spiritual journey.
Most of you know what cannabis does and its effects, but many are unaware
of the vast science behind it and its intricate properties.
Cannabis, also known as marijuana or "weed," is a psychoactive drug
intended for medicinal and recreational use. It is used for its mental and
physical effects, providing results such as a change in perception, heightened
mood, and the numbing of the physical body. The cannabis plant is naturally
grown on the Earth. Its use has become so widespread that many countries,
including Canada, have legalized its use.
Cannabis contains all Five Elements within it, and it activates all of the
Seven Chakras. The very leaf of the cannabis plant is symbolic, as it has
seven points or parts that comprise it. Seven is a significant number in
esotericism and religious traditions. Firstly, we have the seven colours of the
rainbow (related to Seven Chakras) and the corresponding Seven Ancient
Planets (Figure 161). Next, we have the seven days of the week
(corresponding with the Seven Ancient Planets), seven keynotes in the
musical scale, seven continents, seven seas, seven holes that lead into the
human body, seven capital (deadly) sins, seven capital virtues, seven
Hermetic Principles of Creation, seven Seals of the Apocalypse in The Holy
Bible, Seven Archangels, seven levels of consciousness in Buddhism, seven
gates of dreaming in Shamanism, and the seven Heavens of Islam, Judaism,
and Hinduism. These associations allude to seven being a very Spiritual
number, coinciding with marijuana being a highly Spiritual drug.
Cannabis is used in medicine to heal the mind, body, and Soul. It numbs
physical pain for cancer patients and affects the emotional state of those
people diagnosed with mental and emotional issues. For example, people
diagnosed with clinical depression turn to cannabis because of its euphoric
effects. It has been proven in clinical studies that cannabis re-grows cells and
renews them. When applied correctly and in the proper doses, cannabis can
be beneficial for you at a cellular level.

A few religions, such as the Rastafarians, even use it regularly as part
of their religious practice. Some sects also use it as part of particular
meditation techniques within their tradition or groups. Most of the world
realizes cannabis's power to connect to the Spirit and heal the mind, body,
and Soul. Other than alcohol, people generally turn to cannabis to get a
glimpse of transcendence in the safest way possible.
Cannabis makes you feel happy and elated. It puts you in touch with the
present moment, the Now, which elevates your consciousness past the
negativities of the mind's content. Unlike alcohol and most other recreational
drugs on the Planet, no one has ever overdosed on cannabis. Of course, one
should act responsibly, such as not operating motor vehicles when under its
influence.

Figure 161: Cannabis Leaf and its Magickal Correspondences

Kundalini and Cannabis Use
Smoking cannabis on your Kundalini transformation journey can have
positive effects. However, you must approach its application like a doctor
and use the information from this section as a guideline for treatment. As
mentioned, certain types and strains of cannabis work well to alleviate some
of the potential adverse effects in the mind and body after a full Kundalini
awakening. These include anxiety, stress, brain fog, moodiness, depression,
sleeplessness, creative blockages, the inability to focus, etc.
Cannabis can give you temporary relief from these symptoms, which
can be quite welcome when you are in a desperate situation, as many are.
However, you should know right from the start that smoking cannabis is a
means to an end and not the end in and of itself. If you view each smoking
session as a learning experience, like a scientist of the mind, you can learn to
reproduce most of its effects over time without its use.
Cannabis was my go-to method of alleviating stress in my 20s and the
only recreational drug that I found beneficial on my Spiritual journey. I
eventually quit smoking it altogether, and I will describe the positive effects
since there are many. Still, when I was dealing with fear and anxiety or
exploring heightened mystical or transcendental states, I used cannabis. For
this reason, I will focus on cannabis more so than other recreational drugs in
this section and give you the fundamental science behind it, as I learned it
over the years. My knowledge and experience in this area can help many
who are open to trying and using cannabis but lack guidance.
Cannabis can be very beneficial by helping to clear up blockages or
improper movement of the Kundalini energy in the system. It moves the
Kundalini inside the Light Body and accelerates its flow through the inner
channels. Once it speeds it up, you are found in an Out-of-Body state with a
whole range of Spiritual experiences. These experiences include heightened
inspiration and creativity, Gnosis, and mystical visions.
Once you vault out of your body, you will remain there while the
cannabis acts on the Kundalini. This process takes a minimum of half an
hour and can last up to three, even four hours. Also, since the Pranic energy
moves quicker through the Kundalini system, it pushes out any negative or
fear-based thoughts or emotions for the time being. For this reason, cannabis
is often prescribed medically to people with chronic anxiety or depression.
And since Kundalini awakened individuals are prone to mental and

emotional issues that stem from fear and anxiety, cannabis can be quite
beneficial to you to help you overcome those states.
As such, I believe cannabis can have a positive role in your Spiritual
journey. It can either serve as a powerful catalyst that can trigger a full
Kundalini awakening or aid you in the transformation process if you are
already awakened. Because it is easy to obtain and use, it is advantageous to
individuals who feel stuck on their Spiritual journey and have nowhere to
turn to for emotional or mental support or need that extra push or nudge to
get them back on track. After all, while in those "high" states, the Ego
becomes silent, enabling us to contact our Higher Self and ask for guidance.
However, there are pitfalls to smoking cannabis which need to be
discussed and explored. For example, you should not smoke cannabis too
often because doing so puts the Kundalini into overdrive, which can have
harmful effects. In other words, you shouldn't solely use cannabis to help
you overcome your negative emotional state but should find a powerful
Spiritual practice like Ceremonial Magick, Yoga, or any of the Spiritual
modalities from this book and then use cannabis as a spice. Cannabis is only
a temporary fix or a medium to explore higher states of consciousness. That
being said, I have never heard of someone living with an awakened
Kundalini who smoked cannabis a few times a month and who harmed
themselves Spiritually.
Since cannabis speeds up the Kundalini system, this can be either good
or bad. It is a good thing because pushing out the mental and emotional
energy blockages ensures that Ida and Pingala function correctly. However,
it can be harmful when there isn't sufficient Prana in the Kundalini system
that cannabis can act on. If it starts to move too fast, it can damage the
overall energy system. For this reason, I said it is crucial not to smoke
cannabis every day. Instead, give yourself time between days to rebuild your
energy system with food intake. Otherwise, blockages or a full short-circuit
can occur.
Cannabis is a drug that primarily works on emotions; hence, Ida's
feminine channel is in jeopardy when smoking cannabis or ingesting it in
edible form. Pingala short-circuits less often than Ida, and it is often the
result of a gradual process of not using your masculine principle, your
willpower, for some time. If you use cannabis haphazardly, you even run the
risk of short-circuiting the Kundalini energy at the centre of the brain, where
all three Nadis meet before rising to Sahasrara. This situation can only

happen if you overuse cannabis and smoke every day, especially if you are
smoking strains that are not conducive to the Kundalini system, like many
Indicas.
Rebuilding the channel from the brain's centre to the top of the head is a
lengthy procedure that can often be achieved with a type of meditation that I
present following this chapter. But if this meditation does not work, more
Pranic energy might be necessary to rebuild the channel received through
food intake and the conservation of your sexual energy. Doing so can restore
the Kundalini strands in the brain, and with the use of the meditation
presented, you can realign the Kundalini and bring it back up to Sahasrara
again.
Most Kundalini awakened individuals I have met on my journey have
experience with cannabis. Many of them use it occasionally and find it
beneficial on their Spiritual journeys. To be clear, I am not propagating the
use of cannabis, but I cannot negate its positive effects either. With that in
mind, cannabis is not for everyone, so tread carefully if you choose to
experiment with it since its effects vary from person to person. However,
there is a high level of consistency regarding particular types and strains that
I will discuss.
Cannabis is volatile. This is its nature. If you smoke whatever you are
offered in social circles, you can get yourself into trouble. It is common to
anticipate a positive experience with street weed but get a negative one
instead. Instead of relaxing your mind as you expect, it can make you
paranoid and agitated instead.
A good knowledge base of cannabis strains will enable you to get a
"controlled" high. It will allow you to control the high process and know
what to expect. Different strains have different mental, emotional, and
physical effects. If you are psychically too sensitive for its use, though, it
won't matter what strain you smoke; you might still get paranoia and anxiety
every time you use it. In my experience, it is more common for women to
get paranoid when using marijuana than men. Regardless, it all depends on
your psychological makeup.
Understand that it is impossible to naturally have the Kundalini energy
expand your energy system if you are smoking cannabis daily. Cannabis
needs the Prana from the food you eat, and it saps it every time you use it.
Therefore, if you smoke daily, there will not be sufficient Pranic energy in
your system for cannabis to act on. As a Kundalini awakened individual, you

mustn't abuse any drugs. Non-awakened people can get away with abusing
cannabis, while an awakened person cannot.
Suppose you are many years into your Kundalini transformation and
have overcome the initial fear and anxiety. In that case, it might be wise to
omit the use of cannabis on your Spiritual journey altogether. By inserting it
into the equation, you will sap the Prana from your energy system, adversely
affecting your goal of naturally reaching transcendental states of
consciousness. Furthermore, you will pay for every positive transcendental
experience when using cannabis since you will have to rebuild the Pranic
system the next day. And if you overuse it, which is common, and tax the
Prana more than you put in, you will be setting yourself back significantly
on your Spiritual journey.

Types and Strains of Cannabis
It is critical to exercise moderation and use cannabis with wisdom and
respect to avoid damaging your energy system. I cannot overstate this
enough. Instead of just wholly discouraging its use, which would be
unrealistic considering the plant's popularity and Spiritual power, I can offer
some insight into the different types and strains of cannabis and warn against
the use of others.
In the past, cannabis was something that grew as a plant outside, which
would be cut, dried, and then smoked to produce a "high." This high was
always almost the same since cannabis retains specific characteristics
outside and loses and gains other properties when grown inside. This type of
cannabis is called Cess. It is natural, outdoor grown, and widely used on
Caribbean islands and then imported to North America.
Cess is how most people over the age of forty know cannabis since this
is what they were exposed to while growing up. In the past ten years,
though, the field of cannabis study has evolved tenfold, and different types
of cannabis have flooded the market. The main reason cannabis has evolved
as a plant is its use in the medical field. As cannabis became accepted as
alternative medicine, certain strains were developed, which I will discuss in
detail. I have found some of these strains to be very beneficial to the
Kundalini awakening process and some useless and even harmful.
The two main types of cannabis that evolved past the Cess era are
Sativas and Indicas. Sativas have a high content of Tetrahydrocannabinol
(THC) and less Cannabidiol (CBD), while Indicas have less THC and more

CBD. CBD is what gives the body a sensation of numbness. It is the stuff
that makes the body feel "high." The higher the CBD content, the more
significant sedating effects on the physical body.
Indicas are often prescribed to cancer patients and people who have
multiple sclerosis, arthritis, and epilepsy. The reason why Indicas are
suitable for these people is because of their body-numbing and painalleviating properties. Most patients with diseases that create physical pain
are prescribed Indicas as it is a body-numbing agent. Many of these patients
also often have problems with eating, and Indicas are known to increase
appetite more than Sativas. The typical effect of many Indicas is "couchlock," meaning it tranquillizes your body and mind so much that you find
yourself unable to get up off the couch.
Cancer patients are also often prescribed CBD oil because of the
concentrated and high level of CBD, delivered in the form of liquid drops.
When cannabis is ingested, it is delivered faster into the body and is usually
much more potent. With CBD oil, you have complete control over how
much CBD you want to bring into the body since the effects are cumulative
to how many drops you take.
Sativas are more of a head or mind high since THC is psychoactive,
meaning it profoundly affects one's psychology. Sativas helps alleviate
mental and emotional issues as this type of cannabis increases creativity
while inducing euphoria and calming down the mind. Sativas are often
prescribed to people that undergo mental and emotional problems, including
chronic anxiety, depression, neuroses, and other issues where the mind is
overtaken by negativity while the physical body remains unaffected. Sativas
work great to relax you but leave you relatively cognizant and functional. On
the other hand, most Indicas, in my experience, seem to turn off all cognitive
functions.
Hybrids are a mix of both Indicas and Sativas. I have found the use of
some Hybrids to be quite beneficial, but they usually have much less CBD
and more THC, which is the nature of Sativas.
In terms of the Kundalini transformation journey, cannabis can be very
beneficial in treating bouts of anxiety, fear, and the overall emotional and
mental negativity that a full Kundalini awakening brings about in most
cases. Also, if you are having difficulty with your appetite due to being
overtaken by fear, smoking cannabis generally produces the "munchies",
meaning you will desire and welcome food after you smoke it. Cannabis is

also suitable for insomnia, which I had an issue with for a few years into the
awakening. Although Indicas are often prescribed for insomnia by doctors, I
always slept like a baby after a session of smoking Sativas.
In terms of my personal experience with cannabis, I have only used
Sativas and learned to stay clear of Indicas early on in my journey. Sativas
always relaxed my mind while taking me on a pleasant mental "trip." They
removed all fear and anxiety by neutralizing my Ego. When I was under the
influence of Sativas, I was enabled to positively reframe everything because
of the heightened feeling of mental elation that I was experiencing. I also
was more in touch with the moment, the Now, and very inspired. I always
felt that my Higher Self was in command for the most part when I was under
the influence of Sativas. Other Kundalini awakened individuals all reported
the same effects. We all generally used Sativas and did not find much use in
Indicas. This is because the Kundalini is a subtle energy that affects one's
psychology instead of the physical body.
Many different types of strains are available on the market, with varied
effects on the mind, body, and Soul. Some Sativas are better for inspiration
and uplifting, while others are grounded but clear. Yet others are very
imaginative and thought-active. When the mind is calm, as is the nature of
what cannabis is known to induce, it naturally goes into a higher state and
taps into the Cosmic Mind.
Sativa strains I enjoyed include Jean Guy (one of my favourites),
Diesel, Sour Diesel, Ultra Sour, Cheese, Nukim, Jack Harer, Grapefruit,
Strawberry, Champagne, Great White Shark, Candy Jack, G-13, Green
Crack, Blue Dream, Maui Wowie, Chocolope, Romulan, Pina Colada, White
Castle, Zeus, G-13 Haze, New Balance, and Moby Dick. Keep in mind that
this list is current up to 2016, which is when I stopped using cannabis. Since
then, I am sure there have been new Sativa strains developed that are useful
but not on this list.
I found that I never really had a negative experience with any Sativa
since they made me productive and creative instead of lethargic. On the
other hand, Indicas would numb me entirely and turn off my mind. This state
of mind may sound appealing to some of you, but understand that by turning
off the mind, the inspiration turns off as well. So the best way to understand
Sativas and Indicas is to say that Sativas inspire while Indicas numb.
Some Indicas are enjoyable, though, and they are the ones that numb
you a little but still keep you relatively inspired. These Indicas are generally

of the Kush and Pink variety, such as Purple Kush, Pink Kush, Kandy Cush,
Cali Cush, Lemon Kush, Bubba Pink, Chemo, and OG Kush. Trainwreck is
also another great Indica that I found was very inspiring. All of these Indica
strains have a high content of CBD but also a proper level of THC. They
calmed me down while removing all anxiety and fear from my system.
My favourite cannabis strain is a Hybrid called Blueberry, a grounding
yet mind-expanding and inspiring strain. Other Hybrids that I found worked
for me are Rockstar, White Widow, Pineapple Express, Girl Guide Cookies,
Blueberry Durban, Hiroshima, Grape Ape, Chemdawg, AK-47, Tangerine
Dream, Alien Cookies, White Russian, Lemon Haze, Jack Haze, and Purple
Haze.

Methods of Using Cannabis
There are four ways to smoke cannabis. You can either roll a joint, use
a pipe, use a bong, or vaporize the cannabis. I always smoked joints, and the
reason is that it was the most efficient way to get the desired effects from the
Sativas. Pipes and bongs would concentrate the cannabis strain too much,
which would lose the subtle effects I was going for. Using a pipe or a bong
would give me more head pressure and "body buzz" I was going for. Both
methods would suspend my cognitive faculties to a certain extent instead of
expanding them, as smoking Sativas in joints would do.
Also, instead of clearing up blockages, I would often create new ones if
I used a pipe or a bong. I only had positive effects when using an ice bong,
which created the desired euphoria by filtering the smoke through ice cubes.
Vaping cannabis involves heating it without actually burning it. The
vaporizer device uses heat to release the active ingredients in the form of a
vapour that you inhale. Smoke is not created with this method since
combustion does not occur. Vaping is safer and less harmful to health than
smoking cannabis. It does not contain any harmful smoke toxins such as tar,
ammonia, and carcinogens found in cannabis smoke.
I found vaping interesting because it was the cleanest way to get high,
but it did not stimulate my Kundalini energy much. I got high, but it would
usually not last long, and it would tire me out tremendously afterwards.
Also, I needed to eat more food with vaping since it sapped more Prana from
my system than smoking Sativas. Therefore, I was not a big fan of vaping
overall.

Cannabis Concentrates and Edibles
To give you the most comprehensive view of cannabis, I have to
address concentrates and edibles. Concentrates are cannabis-derived extracts
that contain concentrated amounts of the psychoactive compound
Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and an assortment of other cannabinoids and
terpenes. I will only address the two most popular concentrates—Hashish
and Shatter.
Hashish is the oldest form of concentrate known to man, and although
its use is not as widespread in North America, countries like Lebanon and
India still produce black market Hashish for export. Shatter is a type of
concentrate that is believed to be the purest and most potent type of cannabis
product. It contains between 60-80% THC, compared to smoking cannabis
which averages 10-25% THC. Both Hashish and Shatter are meant to be
smoked, not ingested.
The main reason why people use concentrates instead of smoking
cannabis is because they are more efficient in producing the desired high
since they are higher in potency. In addition, they provide faster relief of
mental, emotional and physical issues.
In terms of my own experience with concentrates, I have found Hashish
to give me similar effects as smoking Indica strains of cannabis. I say
similar, but not the same. The body buzz or body high is the collective
effect, although Hashish is more potent than Indica strains and has more
hallucinogenic properties. I found myself lacking mental functionality under
its influence. In most cases, my cognitive faculties would be turned off
entirely, whereas, with Indicas, I could still function to some extent.
Regarding the Kundalini activity, I did not find Hashish helpful in removing
blockages in the system as I did with smoking Sativas.
Shatter, on the other hand, is a whole different animal. Smoking Shatter,
popularly known as doing "dabs," is a cumbersome procedure. It requires
you to use a unique device for smoking called an "oil rig" and a torch lighter.
The oil rig is similar to a bong, only specifically created for smoking Shatter.
I found it rather inconvenient to smoke Shatter because of the specialised
tools required. Joints and even pipes you can smoke just about anywhere,
whereas bongs and Shatter are mainly smoked indoors. Vaping you can do
outdoors in compact vaporiser devices or indoors in more elaborate ones.
I have found Shatter to give me the most prominent high I ever had off
cannabis type products. I found its impact similar to the effects I got from

Sativas, only far more considerable. I got very high, very quickly. It was
inspiring, yes, but because of the high concentration of THC, it would wear
me out very quickly. First, it stimulated my Kundalini into activity, but then
as I stayed high for an extended period, it just turned it off entirely. Once this
happened, it did not matter where I was; I needed to close my eyes and rest. I
was burnt out very quickly with the use of Shatter, and because of this, I
could not do dabs more than a few times a month.
This brings me to an important point: the necessity for sleep after
smoking cannabis or concentrates. I found that other than with Sativas, I was
always exhausted after the high wore off and needed to sleep right away in
most cases. Vaping and Shatter got me the most tired and burnt out. In most
cases, I was not functional afterwards. Hence why I primarily stuck with
smoking Sativas in joints only.
Another popular cannabis product is edibles. These are cannabisinfused foods and drinks. When you eat activated cannabinoids, the
metabolised THC becomes even more psychoactive than ever as it is
absorbed through the digestive system rather than the bloodstream. As a
result, the high produced has an entirely different sensation than that of
smoking cannabis.
The most popular and widely used edibles are cannabis brownies and
cookies. All edibles are made by incorporating cannabis oils and butters,
which means that just about any food recipe can include cannabis. The most
challenging part of edibles is the proper dosing. Since effects take time to set
in, sometimes up to two hours, it is easy to take the process for granted and
ingest more than you need, which can and does lead to an unpleasant
experience. I have personally witnessed people have massive psychotic
breaks from overdosing with edibles. Because of the tendency for people to
take too many edibles since it takes a while for them to kick in, I am
dumbfounded that their use is legal. It is highly irresponsible for
governments to include edibles as part of legal cannabis products without
informing people on proper dosage and potential side effects when not
followed.
Edibles stimulate the Kundalini energy into activity, and a smaller dose
can push out any mental or emotional blockages. On the other hand, if you
take too much, the entire experience can be so intense that you will feel like
you are on LSD, mushrooms, or another highly psychoactive drug.

Controlled Substances and Short-Circuits
When it comes to alcohol, I don't feel the need to describe what it does
and how it works since I think it's common knowledge. Instead, I will
mention alcohol's direct effect on the Kundalini system for those of you who
have made it a part of your life. Alcohol can and does create energy
blockages when used in excess. It can short-circuit Ida and Pingala, but this
is rarer than compared to recreational drugs. However, copious amounts of
alcohol, which work to affect your state of mind and shift it to a high degree,
can harm your Kundalini system.
The rule of thumb is that any recreational drug or substance which
affects and alters the state of mind can hurt the Kundalini awakened person.
Coffee in significant quantities can also be detrimental. I have never
experienced a short circuit due to drinking coffee, but then again, I have
never had more than three cups of coffee in a day. I believe that the general
rule of thumb of any substance which affects the thoughts and emotions can
and will cause a short-circuit if overused.
Hard, illegal drugs such as cocaine, ecstasy, MDMA, mushrooms, LSD,
and others can short-circuit either Ida or Pingala or both. Cocaine works to
amplify willpower primarily, which then puts Pingala in jeopardy. Overuse
of cocaine can most definitely cause a short-circuit. On the other hand,
Ecstasy and MDMA work on emotions and feelings, which puts Ida in peril.
While cocaine increases dopamine levels, ecstasy and MDMA increase
serotonin levels. The incredible high will be followed by a potentially
devastating emotional low when either your dopamine or serotonin levels are
depleted. For this reason, cocaine addicts generally have anger issues, while
regular ecstasy or MDMA users suffer from depression—their nervous
systems are completely out of balance.
Mushrooms and LSD are powerful psychoactive drugs with high
hallucinogenic properties that affect Ida and Pingala. After all, hallucinating
affects both willpower and emotions at the same time. The same goes for
alcohol abuse, which puts Ida and Pingala at risk. Since it is grown in the
Earth, the same as cannabis, mushrooms are the safest way for one to
experience altered states of consciousness. However, one must be prepared
for this experience mentally and emotionally since it lasts for many hours.
Cannabis, as mentioned, puts Ida in danger. Still, nowadays, with the
varied and powerful cannabis strains available that impact both willpower
and emotions, it can affect both Ida and Pingala. For example, I can imagine

that smoking too much of an Indica strain can be detrimental to the integrity
of one's willpower since this type of marijuana turns off the Fire Element's
influence almost entirely. Conversely, smoking Sativa strains of cannabis,
which affect the emotional state, the Water Element, can and does jeopardise
the Ida channel when done in excess.
I don't agree with people saying that cannabis is a gateway drug to hard,
illegal drugs like the ones I mentioned and injectable ones like heroin. If
anything, cannabis is a gateway to the mind. If you have a propensity to try
drugs and experiment with them, you will do so without necessarily trying
cannabis first. As a final statement on this topic, I wish to emphasize that
there is zero therapeutic value to using any of these recreational drugs other
than cannabis, which is also used as a medicinal drug.

***
I hope that my experience with cannabis and cannabis-related products
have been insightful, as intended. However, understand that cannabis is not
for everyone. Therefore, make your own judgements and proceed at your
discretion based on the information you have received. Regardless, the taboo
in society needs to be removed concerning cannabis use, especially for the
sake of Kundalini awakened initiates, because most awakened people I have
come across drew positive experiences from using it.
Also, keep in mind that present-day strains are much more powerful
than ones of the past and should be approached with caution. It is best to
always start with a small dose and increase accordingly so that you can get
familiar with the effects of a particular strain. Listen to your body and mind
and approach cannabis like a scientist so you can figure out what strains
work well for you.
Using cannabis in a meditative and ritualistic setting will have much
different effects than smoking it recreationally with friends or at parties. I
always advise to use cannabis with proper intention and Spiritual work in
mind. As a Kundalini awakened individual, Sativas were a blessing in my
life when I was in a time of need. If they did not exist, I probably would not
have smoked the other types of cannabis at all.
However, it is easy to develop a dependency on cannabis if you smoke
regularly. Anything can start off as a positive thing and then turn negative if
you overdo it. I found myself in this situation for about a year and a half,
right before I decided to quit altogether in 2016.

After quitting what became my addiction at the time, I experienced
tremendous positive changes in mind, body, and Soul that are worth
mentioning. Firstly, my drive and ambition have increased tenfold.
Irrespective of some people saying otherwise, smoking cannabis affects
productivity in your life. A lot. You may not see it if you are stuck inside the
frame like I was, but it does. It also affects your desire to stand out from the
crowd and seek greatness.
Cannabis makes you content with life, and when you are overly
comfortable, you stop seeking change and trying to better yourself and your
life. When you are high, you elevate above your emotions, but because you
don't process them naturally, you rob yourself of learning from them and
advancing in different areas of your life. After all, one of the reasons why we
have such powerful feelings is because we are meant to learn from them and
grow psychologically.
Cannabis neutralises fear, which is good when you are desperate, but
remember, fear exists to make us strong. By becoming dependent on any
substance to help us deal with fear energy, we prevent ourselves from further
evolving naturally. Yes, life is more difficult without drugs and alcohol to
help us take the edge off. But the more challenging something is, the reward
is that much sweeter.
If you introduce drugs and alcohol into the equation, you prevent
yourself from developing the necessary mental anchors that help when
dealing with challenging times. As humans, we require life's resistance to
become strong and learn to deal with difficult situations in life. We need fear
as a building block so we can develop courage.
Keep in mind now that I am speaking to people who have developed a
dependency on cannabis. If you smoke it a few times a month, I don't see
how it can have any real adverse side effects. Just be mindful that you are
dealing with something that can become addictive if you don't practice
moderation.

PART XI:
KUNDALINI
MEDITATIONS

TROUBLESHOOTING THE SYSTEM
Having gone through many challenging situations during my Kundalini
awakening, I was forced to troubleshoot my issues and discover ways to help
myself. Most people will go through adverse experiences that shock the
Kundalini system and then cope with the ramifications without viable
methods of helping themselves. Most awakened people who experience a
Kundalini short-circuit work on rebuilding the energy back through food
intake, which could take at least a few months or more. However, I have
found ways to reconnect the channels through different meditations in as
little as half an hour at most, sometimes even a few minutes. I will discuss
these meditations below, giving you proper guidance on applying each for
various situations.
1. Tongue on Roof of Mouth (Jiva Bandha)
Place the tip of your tongue on the fleshy mound right behind your
upper teeth. The middle of your tongue should lock in with the indented part
in the roof of your mouth. This powerful exercise called Jiva Bandha in
Yogic teachings is essential for Kundalini awakened individuals since it
completes the Kundalini circuit by allowing the energy to move upwards. It
first enters the frontal part of the Mind’s Eye tunnel, slightly between the
eyebrows, and then progressively passes through the Fourth, Fifth, Sixth,
and finally, Seventh Eye, which is one of the exit points of the Kundalini that
completes its circuit.
Performing this exercise directs your focus into the highest two Spirit
Chakras, Ajna and Sahasrara, instead of the lower Chakras. It will enable
your Higher Self to take over the consciousness through intuition received
from Ajna Chakra, overcoming the impetus from the Lower Self, the Ego.
Make this exercise a regular part of your day. Try to have your tongue on the
roof of your mouth as often as possible to allow the energy to channel
upwards into the frontal cortex of your brain. This area is where Ida and
Pingala converge at the Mind’s Eye centre right above the middle of your
eyebrows, just inside the head.

This particular exercise is also used to rebuild the Kundalini system
once you have experienced a short circuit. Remember, unless Ida and
Pingala converge at Ajna Chakra, the Kundalini circuit will remain open,
which will cause mental and(or) emotional problems. Placing the tongue on
the roof of the mouth with continuity and diligence will allow Ida and
Pingala to re-converge at Ajna and naturally move upwards into the Seventh
Eye Center as one stream of energy. As such, the Kundalini circuit will
close, which will allow you to experience the ecstatic realm of Non-Duality,
the Spiritual Realm, through the Bindu Chakra at the top, back of the head.

Figure 162: The Major Head Energy Centres

2. Mind’s Eye Meditation
The first and most critical meditation is on the Mind's Eye, Ajna
Chakra's energy portal, a centre of consciousness that is a window into the
Cosmic Realms. This portal’s frontal entrance is located between the
eyebrows, just above eye level, on your forehead. However, the location of
its meditation point is one centimetre from the skin's surface, inside the
head. (Use Figure 162 as a reference for locating the Major Head Energy
Centres, while Figure 163 refers to the actual meditation points related to
those centres.)
You can look up at this point with your eyes closed by slightly
projecting your eyes upwards. Ida and Pingala converge at this point, which
is necessary to complete the Kundalini circuit. If you fall short of this
convergence of Ida and Pingala, the circuit will not be fully active within the
Body of Light.
Focusing your attention on this point during meditation stimulates the
Pineal Gland, which has an intimate connection with the Soul. You will feel
a magnetic pull towards the Mind's Eye if you focus on it correctly.
Attention should always be placed at the Mind's Eye, which, when
appropriately applied, stimulates the Bindu at the back of the head, affecting
the flow of energy in the Kundalini circuit and making it funnel outwards
from the Bindu.
To perform this meditation correctly, lie on your back with your hands
outstretched and gently place your attention on the Mind's Eye. You can
control your breathing with the Four-Fold Breath, which will also aid in
allowing you to attain a meditative state. Attention needs to be held on the
Mind’s Eye even while any thoughts or visuals run through your mind. If
you keep your attention at this spot successfully for approximately two to
three minutes, sometimes less, the re-convergence will occur, and the energy
system will reactivate.
Now, during the day, you will have clarity of mind and thoughts,
including equilibrium in your emotions. You may not feel like you made a
big difference at first, but once you take in some food and get some good
sleep, you will feel a sense of renewal and will start to generate inspiration
again. Without this convergence of Ida and Pingala, it is impossible to create
momentum and remain inspired for any significant length of time.

3. Seventh Eye Meditation
The Seventh Eye is located where your hairline meets your forehead, in
the centre. This location point is approximately one centimetre outside your
head, right above that point. The Kundalini energy needs to exit from this
point since the Seventh Eye is the counterpart of the Bindu point at the top
back of the head. They work together to circulate Kundalini energy
throughout the body.
If the Kundalini circuit is stagnant or inactive, this is one of the
meditations you can do to kick-start it back up again. If there is a blockage at
this point or the Kundalini circuit has ceased functioning, it is necessary to
re-open this channel and get it to funnel the energy correctly. If this point is
not active, you will notice no visual component associated with your thought
processes and that your inspiration is low. Your imaginative powers will be
affected, and you will lose your connection to the Now, the present moment,
making you introverted and fall prey to the Ego.
The Third Eye centre is the access point for the energy to move to the
Seventh Eye and the Bindu at the back of the head. Therefore, I recommend
doing the Mind's Eye meditation first to help move the energy upwards into
the higher centres of the head. Then, focusing on the Seventh Eye will
complete the final step of moving the energy out of the head to complete the
circuit.
For this meditation, lie on your back with your palms outstretched and
focus the energy at the Seventh Eye centre. Perform the Four-Fold Breath to
calm your mind. If you hold your attention on the Seventh Eye for two to
three minutes uninterrupted, the Kundalini energy will rise and pass through
this point. As such, the Bindu will become reactivated, allowing the
Kundalini circuit to flow correctly in the Body of Light.
For the rest of the day, I recommend spending time in solitude. In my
experience, once I do the Seventh Eye meditation, my energy gets quite
affected for the day, which throws me off when I interact with others. This
exercise saps Prana from the system, making you come off lifeless,
unbalanced, and emotionally down when talking to other people. After a
good night's sleep, though, the circuit should regenerate with Pranic energy
and become optimised, getting you back to 100%.
Also, food intake is essential to power the system back up after this
meditation. You may need a day or two of food intake to fully regenerate

your inner energies since working with the Seventh Eye and Bindu puts
more strain on the Kundalini circuit than just working with the Mind's Eye.
These two points are the exit points of the Kundalini energy; thus, working
with them can highly affect your psychological state.

4. Occipital Eye Meditation
This meditation is for more advanced initiates because you have to have
built up the Spirit energy inside your system (which only occurs when the
Kundalini circuit is active for some time) so that it starts to transform from
the Fire energy into a cooling liquid, Spirit energy. This Spirit energy will
make you feel like you are made of liquid Mercury, which brings about a
cooling feeling in your Body of Light and complete transcendence in
consciousness.
This liquid Spirit pours into the back of the head naturally. Some people
have even reported a feeling of it dropping to the back of their throat. In my
opinion, these claims are misunderstandings that relate to perception. As I
discussed in an earlier chapter, it is easy to mistake something happening in
the Body of Light as happening to the physical body after a Kundalini
awakening. After all, both are experienced as real to the consciousness, and
since the Body of Light is a new thing, the consciousness needs some time to
learn to differentiate between the two. This is my opinion, at least, but one
that I am willing to debate with anyone, having witnessed this phenomenon
for over seventeen years.
The Occipital Eye is located directly opposite the Mind’s Eye.
Therefore, you should focus on a meditation point one centimetre on the
inside of the head to pull the energy to the back of the head. However, if you
find that this is not working for you, you can focus one centimetre on the
outside of the head in the same area. Since you are trying to pull the energy
back in your head, you might need to work with both meditation points since
energy can get trapped there and will require some creativity on your part to
push through and create a proper flow.
To aid in this meditation, I like to imagine my Astral Self standing one
foot outside of me, looking directly at the back of my head. By holding this
vision or by keeping my attention at one of the two meditation points for the
Occipital Eye, an alignment will occur where the liquid Spirit energy gets

pulled towards the back of the head, which pushes out any stagnations or
blockages of energy, optimising the flow of the Kundalini circuit.

Figure 163: The Kundalini Meditations

5. Bindu Chakra Meditation
The Bindu Chakra is essential because it is the exit point that completes
the Kundalini circuit. When the Kundalini is allowed to funnel out of this
point, consciousness experiences Oneness with all things, a state of perpetual
meditation and pure transcendence. This is because the Bindu is the doorway
to the Causal Chakra, where duality meets Non-Duality. Therefore,
meditating on this point is vital to maintaining the integrity of the Kundalini
circuit. There needs to be a constant subtle pulling of the energy outwards to
the top back of the head.
An adequate flow of energy at this point causes you to see yourself in
the third-person. It creates a feeling of your consciousness being elevated
above your physical body where you can see your face from a third-person
perspective. This way, you continually perceive your physical Self, your
facial expressions and the energy you put out into the Universe, along with
your inner thoughts, simultaneously. This state of Being indicates a high
state of Spiritual evolution with the Kundalini energy.
The Bindu point is at the top back of the head, directly opposite the
Seventh Eye. Its meditation point is one centimetre outside the head, just like
the Seventh Eye. This meditation is more common than the Seventh Eye and
will alleviate more problems, mentally and emotionally. When there is too
much stagnant energy in the head, the Ego will use this situation for its
agenda by introducing negative thoughts that create fear to hijack the
consciousness. This will cause the Kundalini to drop down from the Bindu
Chakra. There doesn't have to be a short-circuiting of any channel for this to
occur; it can happen from increased stress or the harbouring of negative
thoughts for an extended period.
To perform this meditation, lie on your back with your hands
outstretched while focusing on the Bindu Chakra's meditation point, which is
one centimetre outside of the top, back of the head. Perform the Four-Fold
Breath to calm the mind and enter a meditative state. Focusing on this point
affects the Bindu and the Causal Chakra, which is intimately linked with the
Bindu.
The key to these head meditations is to focus your attention on a
particular point inside or outside the head for two to three minutes with total
concentration. I like to imagine myself tapping the meditation point
continually with my index finger. Keep in mind that I am talking about

imagining my Astral finger doing this with the power of my mind. This way,
I incorporate imagination and willpower, thus utilizing both the Ida and
Pingala channels. Doing so stimulates the energy and pushes it outwards,
thereby completing the circuit. This meditation can also be performed while
sitting down, while the other meditations mentioned so far work best lying
down, in my experience.

6. Subconscious Eye Meditation
The Subconscious Eye allows all fully Kundalini awakened individuals
to see the content in their subconscious mind to gain mastery over their
thoughts and reality. This psychic centre lies at the point where the middle of
the eyes meets the bridge of the nose. However, suppose there is an increase
of negative energy and fearful thoughts within the mind. In that case, this
release point gets blocked up, and the individual cannot view the
subconscious content.
Ida may collapse simultaneously, or it is Ida collapsing that often causes
this psychic centre to close. Remember, all stress, anxiety, and negative,
fearful thoughts put Ida in jeopardy when focused on for too long. If Ida
does collapse, or if it happens on its own, this point will need to reopen
before it can function well again. The location you need to focus on is just
above the bridge of the nose, one centimetre outside of the head.
When you are breathing, this psychic centre breathes with you. Pranic
energy is being fed into the Subconscious Eye that enables you to have
healthy thoughts and emotions. Every waking breath should renew your
mind when these psychic centres work correctly. If any energy at this point
stagnates, you will have an unhealthy, fear-ridden mind. You will have a
hard time looking forward to the future and will cling to the past, continually
thinking about it obsessively.
Obsessive thoughts or emotions often cause this psychic centre to get
blocked up since by thinking obsessively about something, you are focusing
your attention on the back of your head too much, which can pull energy
away from the Five Psychic Eyes and the Subconscious Eye, causing some
of them to get blocked up. Remember, the actual location of the
subconscious mind is at the back of the head, while the Subconscious Eye is
a window or portal that enables us to view its content.

This meditation is to be performed while lying down with palms
outstretched. It would help if you utilized the Four-Fold Breath to keep
yourself in the right mind state while you perform this meditation. Attention
is to be held at the point described for at least two to three minutes,
uninterrupted. If successful, there will be a cooling feeling on the bridge of
the nose, and you will feel the pressure there as energy exits out of it into the
atmosphere before you. You will feel an immediate release from past
thoughts and an ability to think about and be excited about the future.

7. Sahasrara Chakra Meditation
Sahasrara Chakra is the most critical Chakra in the context of a
Kundalini awakening since it is our connection with the Spiritual Source, the
White Light. Sahasrara is the highest on the body at the top, centre of the
head, and its function regulates the complete Kundalini circuit when opened
and active. Therefore, there always needs to be a flow of energy into it;
otherwise, the Kundalini circuit will cease functioning. In the rare event that
the Kundalini energy drops down from Sahasrara, this simple meditation can
raise it back up again, causing the central flow of energy through Sushumna
to function correctly. Remember, Ida, Pingala, and Sushumna unite at Ajna
as one stream of energy that rises to Sahasrara. So if this stream of energy
drops below Sahasrara, this is the meditation you need to use to bring it back
up.
To perform this meditation, lie on your back with palms outstretched.
First, utilise the Four-Fold Breath to get yourself in a meditative state. Next,
close your physical eyes and roll them back, trying to look up at the top of
your head, approximately two centimetres above the centre of your skull.
Although Sahasrara is at the top, centre of the head, I have found that
focusing two centimetres above it instead of one, or directly on it, facilitates
a necessary push for the Kundalini energy channel to rise into Sahasrara.
Hold your attention on this point for two to three minutes,
uninterrupted. If successful, you will feel a flow of energy move through
your brain, reaching Sahasrara. If this does not work and you feel a definite
drop from Sahasrara, then you will need to rebuild the Kundalini strands in
your head through food intake, transforming food into Light energy or
Prana. You may need a few weeks to a month. You can perform this

meditation every few days as you rebuild your Body of Light fuel to take
care of this situation.

8. Holding an Image in the Mind Meditation
Another fundamental meditation that can help alleviate mental and
emotional problems is to imagine a simple object in your mind and hold its
visual image with total concentration. It helps if the thing you are imagining
is something that you have in your hand often, like your cellphone, so that
you can reimagine how it looks and feels in your hand, using your Astral
senses and the power of your mind.
This meditation is helpful if there is a blockage at the Bindu Chakra and
when no other head points meditations work. It is a powerful meditation
because it incorporates both the Ida and Pingala channels during its
performance. When you do any mental activity that requires your willpower,
you are using your Pingala channel. Conversely, when using your
imagination and are thinking up an image in your mind, you are using your
Ida channel. By holding a picture in your mind for an extended period, you
are reopening and realigning both Ida and Pingala and allowing them to
funnel out the Bindu Chakra, as is natural for them to do in fully Kundalini
awakened individuals.
You will notice that if you perform this meditation, the visual
component of holding the image in your mind will enhance and become
more defined. You may even feel movements of energy in your body, along
the front of your torso, on either side, where Ida and Pingala channels are.
You may also feel streaks of energy moving through the front of your face.
For example, an alignment may occur in an energy channel that
centrally moves across your chin to your bottom lip. You may also feel
energy moving within your brain, as the Kundalini strands are being infused
with liquid Spirit. If you feel any of these movements, it is a good sign that
your meditation is working and Ida and Pingala are aligning. When your
meditation is successful, you should finally feel pressure at the top back of
your head as your Bindu Chakra gets infused, signalling that the Kundalini
circuit has fully reactivated.

9. Becoming One with an Object Meditation

Another powerful meditation to optimise the Ida and Pingala channels
and realign the Kundalini circuit is to focus on an object in front of you for
an extended period. This meditation aims to exit outside of yourself and
become one with the object, feeling its essence. You become externalised
when you do this, allowing the Nadis to realign and assume their natural
flow. It is generally our mind's content and the misuse of our willpower that
blocks or stagnates the flow of the Nadis.
The key is to keep an empty mind and intense focus on whatever object
you are meditating on. Feel its texture and use your Astral senses on it. Clear
your mind, and don't listen to the thoughts of your Ego as it tries to deter you
from the task at hand.
You can also meditate on a fixed point of your choice or a picture.
However, I find that meditating on a Three-Dimensional object works better
since you can use all of your Astral senses on it, enabling your mind to keep
busy, which induces silence. Using the Astral senses in meditation is a good
distraction for the mind since it cannot focus on that and thinking
simultaneously.
Absorb yourself entirely in the object or fixed point, or picture, without
losing focus. You can blink, although your eyes should water slightly when
done correctly, signalling a powerful concentration. As you perform this
meditation, be mindful of the Bindu point at the top back of the head. After
about five to ten minutes of this exercise, you should feel your Nadis realign
as your Bindu point becomes infused with energy. This is a sign that the
Kundalini circuit has become optimised.

10. Meditating on the Earth Star Chakra
Since the Earth Star Chakra provides the feminine and masculine
currents for the Ida and Pingala Nadis, if there is a lack of energy streaming
through either of them, you might need to meditate on their source to power
them back up again. You can do so by placing your attention on the soles of
your feet and holding it there, uninterrupted, while focusing on the Earth
Star six inches below the feet.
Remember, the Pingala channel runs through the right leg and heel,
while the Ida channel runs through the left. Both connect with the Earth Star
Chakra. So if you did your meditation correctly, you would feel an energy
alignment at the lower part of the heel corresponding with Muladhara

Chakra, signalling that Ida or Pingala have reactivated. At the same time,
meditating on the Earth Star provides the most optimal grounding necessary
to keep the other Chakras and Subtle Bodies in balance. So, practice this
meditation often, even if you aren’t experiencing issues with the Ida or
Pingala channels.

***
A final note on Kundalini short-circuits and the meditations presented
in this chapter. First, understand that short-circuits, in general, are not
dangerous in a physical sense but a psychological one. Therefore, doing
these meditations cannot harm you but can significantly benefit you
Spiritually and allow you to control your reality experience instead of being
at the mercy of the Kundalini energy.
However, even though these meditations have worked for me in almost
all instances, I cannot guarantee that they will work for you every time.
Having developed them, I have obtained an intuitional connection with each
meditation where, after diagnosing the problem, I can implement the right
one to a 90% accuracy. This I cannot impart on you but hope that you can
learn to do the same with practice and experience.
I believe that the manual for our Kundalini systems is the same and that
the Creator would not make my Kundalini system different from yours
because we are all made of the same physical, emotional, mental and
Spiritual components. Hence, I believe that Kundalini issues are Universal,
meaning that these meditations should work for you also.
In closing, I hope that by using these meditations, you will look for
ways to advance them and find discoveries of your own. We must
collectively keep the Kundalini Science continually evolving and reaching
new heights so that those who come after us will build on our mistakes and
findings. In doing so, we are not only developing ourselves, but the
Kundalini Science as a field of study.

PART XII:
KUNDALINI
COUNSELLING

GENERAL TIPS
Over the past seventeen years, I have had many Kundalini awakened
people contact me over social media asking for advice on what to expect
and how to deal with potential issues that arise in their transformation
process. I found that many of their questions and concerns were the same,
and their inquiries shared a common thread since the transformation process
is Universal. This chapter will discuss these commonalities and share some
general tips for those of you amid a Kundalini transformation.
The Kundalini is not a physical manifestation, although it often feels
like it is. As the Body of Light is perfecting itself over time, consciousness
oscillates between the physical body and the Body of Light, trying to make
sense of things. Before the awakening, consciousness used to only operate
from the physical body. Therefore, the different manifestations of the
Kundalini may feel physical at first, but they are not.
People often tell me that they feel pressure in different parts of their
body, usually in their head or heart area, and ask why this is happening.
They want to know when it will stop and whether these issues will progress
to bodily diseases. Understand that the Kundalini is working through an
area with psychic centres it needs to awaken to localise the energy there.
Sometimes, this requires pushing against energetic blockages formed over
time by negative thoughts and beliefs about oneself and life in general.
Although it feels like physical pressure, it manifests on the Astral Plane.
However, since the mind is the connecting link, it misinterprets this
information. After all, the mind has never experienced anything like this
before, and it gets confused easily in this situation. So, it is not uncommon
for the person experiencing these sensations to begin to feel fear and
anxiety from thinking that something harmful is happening to their physical
body.
The Chakras and the surrounding nerves that innervate the organs need
to be infused fully with the Light of the Kundalini to allow it to circulate
unimpeded in the Body of Light. Due to Karmic energy accumulating in the
Chakras throughout someone's life, these areas can become blocked. The
Kundalini needs to apply pressure in this area through mild and steady heat
to eradicate and remove these blockages.

The Kundalini is raw Fire energy that transforms into liquid Sprit
through the sublimation of Prana via food intake coupled with the
transmutation of one's sexual energy. This Spirit energy can pierce through
any blockages, but it first needs to be converted into its subtle form by the
Kundalini Fire. From observing this process in my own Body of Light, I
have found that this transformation happens in the area where the Kundalini
is clearing blockages.
The most common areas for blockages to be cleared are the head and
the heart. People will feel pressure in their head for months, maybe even
years, while the Kundalini is transforming into this finer liquid Spirit and
opening the brain centres. And as you have learned so far, there are many
critical brain centres to be opened, like the Thalamus, Hypothalamus, and
Pituitary and Pineal Glands. The brain is the hub that contains these
important energy centres. The Chakras and the Nadis are connected to the
brain via the nervous system. The brain is the motherboard; proper wiring
needs to be created in the Body of Light for it to operate most efficiently.
Otherwise, the Kundalini circuit will not work correctly.
Anahata, the Heart Chakra, is another critical area where the Kundalini
Fire must work through energetic obstacles to create the necessary wiring.
After Hara Chakra, Anahata is the second-largest convergence of Nadis in
the body. On the left side of it is the Ida channel which needs to open
correctly to optimise its energy flow. On the right side is the Pingala
channel. Both require a sufficient flow of this Spirit energy working
through them not to feel strange pressure, which creates fearful and
worrisome thoughts.
After the Kundalini energy awakens, palpitations in the physical heart
are frequent as high levels of adrenaline, dopamine, and serotonin are
released in the body, causing an accelerated heart rate. The occasional
skipping of heartbeats happens as well, which I have found to be caused by
fear-based memories that surface from the subconscious to be
reexperienced to remove their emotional charge.
These situations are nothing to worry about since they are Universal in
their expression and will continue to manifest for years to come, especially
in the early stages. With different hormones being pumped into the heart,
incredible feelings of heightened elation are experienced. The rush of
energy in the heart is ecstatic and impossible to describe to someone who

hasn't experienced it. The adrenals can become exhausted throughout this
process, which you can replenish with Vitamin C.
The Kundalini energy may also encounter blockages in other body
areas, usually in the torso. The energy may work through different organs,
and it can feel like an organ is in danger. I have never found this to be the
case, though, nor have I heard of anyone having real organ failures in this
situation. So, again, it may feel physical to you, but it will not negatively
impact the organ. However, it should be noted that there can be
psychosomatic effects if you are too focused on thinking that the pressure is
physical. In other words, you may develop physical pain, but only because
you are so concentrated on the idea that it manifests. Still, however, it does
not manifest in a way that can harm you.
Overall, my advice is always the same, and this advice applies to all
things concerning the awakening at any stage—if you feel fear, go through
it. Please don't focus on the fear since it is the fear that affects you
negatively and not the Kundalini itself. Fear creates anxiety, which works
against the Kundalini. It battles the Kundalini process as it is occurring
inside of you. The physical, emotional and mental Subtle Bodies need to be
relaxed and at peace for the Kundalini to do its work. If there is anxiety
present in any one area, it will prevent the flow of the Kundalini in one of
its many different states. These blockages will only seem to get stronger
and worsen if you invoke anxiety. Instead, you need to practice being
relaxed in mind, body and Soul even when the experience may seem
intense.
Once the Kundalini is wholly awakened and working through you, it is
best if you stop meditating for a little while. At this point, all that does is
focus the energy inside the head, which is no longer necessary. If you have
awakened the Kundalini, you have already reached the goal of all
meditation anyways. Therefore, spending as much time away from your
thoughts and more time in nature or with people will benefit you. When I
say people, I mean positive-minded people, not negative ones. Relaxing in
all parts of the Self and focusing on bringing in nutritious food will be all
that is required of you.
Do not despair if you are having difficulty sleeping, as will often
happen during the first few years after the awakening. There is no use in
trying to induce sleep at all costs, only to get frustrated when it doesn't
happen. Instead, go and do something productive to work off the energy

preventing you from sleeping. Doing creative activities will help transform
the energy and put you in touch with the imagination and willpower, which
will help inspire you and aid you in reaching a calm state, inducing sleep
naturally. Always remember, creativity also uses love energy, so any
activity that is a creative one is productive since it uses love. This rule
applies as you are going through the awakening at any point in your life.
We are always trying to align with love as much as we can as we go through
this.
I had insomnia for years after my awakening and would oscillate
between intense Lucid Dreams and complete lack of sleep and the inability
to induce dreams at all. Over time, I learned not to worry or stress out when
this happens, although this can be difficult to do if you have something
important the next day that you need to be well-rested. You have to learn to
go with it and not fight it. There is no choice. As soon as you accept this,
you will be better off. Living the regular nine to five lifestyle can be a
challenge, but it is one that you need to accept and work through. The more
you fight it, the more you are hindering the Kundalini transformation
process.
If you cannot induce sleep during the night, the body is signalling to
you that it does not need rest. Maybe the mind does, and you can rest the
mind by simply relaxing on your back while awake. It sometimes helps to
take a melatonin pill right before bed that you can find at your local drug
store. But if you cannot induce sleep, it merely means that there is too much
activity in the Body of Light, and you need to accept this. You will be a
little more lucid the following day, but you should be able to tackle
everything you need. Not being able to sleep means the Kundalini is in
overdrive, transforming your mind, body, and Soul at a deep level. Put
yourself in autopilot mode as much as possible and let it do what it needs to
do.
One aspect of the Kundalini transformation is that the amount of sleep
needed to function 100% the next day is substantially less than a person
without active Kundalini. Six hours of sleep should suffice most days, I
have found. A full eight hours of sleep is optimal, while anything more than
eight is excessive and not needed. However, in the beginning stages, you
may need more than eight hours of sleep, especially if your Kundalini is
very active during the night.

As the years went by, I have found that more than eight hours of sleep
left me less focused and sluggish the next day. Optimally, between six to
eight hours of sleep has been proven to be the best for me. I had also had
many sleepless nights when the Kundalini was very active. But I overcame
this by relaxing my mind during the night instead, which allowed me to still
function at 95% the next day with my usual laser-like sharpness and focus.
However, this was after at least five years of the Kundalini transformation
process and once I tuned my consciousness with the Higher Self. If you find
yourself aligned more with your Ego, you will need more sleep.

COMMON QUESTIONS
After assuming the role of Kundalini teacher and guide over many
years, I have responded to countless questions from many different
Kundalini initiates about their awakening and transformation process. I
have compiled the most common inquiries into a series of Q and As from
our correspondences.
I had a spontaneous Kundalini awakening almost one year ago.
Now, the emotional turmoil and fear that I am faced with are unbearable.
I have lost my job, my relationships have fallen apart, and I am ready to
give up. I have no more energy left to continue forward. What words of
wisdom do you have for me?
Don't despair, my friend. Many people have been in your shoes, and
many more will be in the future. As bad as things may seem now, always
remember that dawn always follows the night. Success is not determined by
how fast you fall but by how quickly you get up and try again. You have to
develop resistance to these challenges that you are faced with, and you will
find the solutions you seek. Don't let fear cripple you, but instead, face your
fears, and you will gain courage. All successful people shine when they
have nothing left, when all their energy is gone, and their tank is on empty.
They use these moments to prove who they are by finding energy from
within themselves to conquer their fears and find success.
Remember, FEAR is False Evidence Appearing Real; it lives in the
realm of duality. The True Self, though, is in the realm of Non-Duality. It is
a Fire that no one but yourself can put out. And time is ticking away for all
of us. Therefore, we must all look at life's challenges and see them as tests
of our willpower. We must have faith in ourselves and the Universe and
meet these challenges with determination and persistence to succeed.
Find your solace in the company of like-minded individuals going
through the same Kundalini awakening process and make brothers and
sisters of them. You are not alone in this. We are all destined to transform
into Beings of Light. It is not an easy process, though. The harder the
journey, the sweeter the reward. Many roads lead to the same goal. If one
does not work, try another. Never give up and be down on yourself because

if you are willing to quit, the Divine has no place for you in the Kingdom of
Heaven.
Whenever my Kundalini energy becomes very active, I become
incredibly paranoid, anxious and afraid. I wonder if I should see a
therapist even though I’m not sure if they will understand what I’m going
through. But, before doing that, what else can I do to overcome these
difficult emotions?
The paranoia and anxiety you are experiencing are typical of what you
are going through. Your condition, though, is not one that can be described
as clinical. You are best off keeping the experience to yourself to save
yourself the disappointment of not being understood by medical personnel.
More importantly, to protect yourself from being put on prescription
medication that will substantially hinder your transformation process.
Spend time outside, connect with nature, and do things external to you
instead of overthinking what you are going through. The Ego doesn't like
that it is undergoing a death process, so it wants to scare you and make you
feel negative about this.
Most importantly, think positively about the whole experience. You are
among the elite in the world, and you have been chosen for whatever
reason. Frankly, years of living in a bad mental state, as is the case in many
newly awakened Kundalini initiates, are well worth the precious jewels that
await you in the future. Besides, your mentality is only a facet of who you
really are. Remember that and be brave. Focusing on fear will prevent you
from living with courage. Instead, be courageous, and the fear will vanish.
There are times when I feel as if my Ego is finally out of the way, but
then it returns with a vengeance, bringing on great fear and emotional
pain. Often, it feels like I am dying a slow and painful death. Why can’t
this be over with? What is happening to me?
Pain and pleasure are both aspects of the same thing. They are linked
to how one reads the reality around them through the mind. By bridging the
conscious with the subconscious, the speed of the pendulum that swings
between pleasure and pain is increased exponentially, giving rise to many
mental issues. The difference is that with a Kundalini activated person, this
process is only temporary and serves to eradicate negative memories, acting

as a wall between the world of pure potential and the limits created by the
mind in its quest for survival.
The Self that has survived thus far is the Ego. The Ego is dying! It
doesn't want to die, much like any other intelligent force in this Universe.
So the eternal witness of the Now, your real Self, stands aside as the Ego
feels the pain knowing that in its death lies true life. Remember, it took
many years for the Ego to develop. As every action has an equal and
opposite reaction, know that it will take many years for it to die as well. It is
a normal part of the transformation process, as is the pain accompanying it.
Once the sufferings of the Ego are cleared, consciousness is free to
experience the pure emotion of the Void, which is a Nirvanic rapture. So
take your time, don't hurry, and after some time, the mind will settle, and
you will become who you are meant to be—a Being of Light!
For the past few months, I have been plagued with debilitating
headaches that sometimes last throughout the night and even into the
next day. I also feel mysterious pains that come and go in different areas
of my body, mainly the torso. What can be done? Is this a normal part of
the Kundalini process?
If you have headaches as a result of an awakened Kundalini, you will
notice that if you take a step back, your headaches are not caused by the
Kundalini but instead by how the mind is interpreting what is happening.
This is because the Kundalini operates within the Astral Plane, but we can
feel it like it is in our physical body. It operates through a different
dimension from the material one that the physical body is a part of.
Maintain relaxation at all times, drink plenty of water, and the
headaches will vanish. Avoid stressful situations and when a headache
occurs, try to figure out its cause and then avoid creating that same cause
the next time or being around it.
Physical pains are attributed to negative energy and Karmic memories
stored in the physical body and organs. Therefore, when the Kundalini has,
on an Astral level (because it only operates Astrally), permeated the areas
that hold the Spiritual counterparts to the body's physical components, there
will be feelings of physical pain felt as it is cleansing through the negativity
in those Spiritual counterparts.

This process is normal and will subside over time. Try a different diet,
Yoga, or grounding techniques to alleviate the pain. Remember, by focusing
your attention on the pain, you make it stronger. So, turn your attention
elsewhere, and the Kundalini will move to where your awareness is. A
fearless mind has no barriers in the Kundalini process!
I have been having different visions involving cats. Sometimes they
are big, and sometimes they are small. They have been silver, black,
yellow and reddish-orange. However, the most prominent vision was a cat
with a broken tail. I’m struggling to make sense of it. Is something broken
inside me?
Interpret visions like this from the point of view of the mind. If the
mind is relaxed and enjoying these images, they are fleeting experiences,
and they don't matter. However, if the mind tangles up with these symbols
and tries to interpret everything happening, you create a maze for yourself
that is hard to get out of without attaching fear to the outcome.
Visions in dreams are usually a result of what the mind is preoccupied
with in the waking state. Since you just had the awakening and are
experiencing a lot of Kundalini activity daily, these visions in your dreams
are trying to let you know something about that.
Cats, regardless of their colour, are symbols of the Kundalini. In
Ancient traditions, cats represented the Great Feminine aspect of Divinity.
These dreams are letting you know that you are undergoing Kundalini
activity. The broken tail might mean an energy blockage, but then again, it
might not. It might mean the mind interpreted a crackling of energy inside
you.
Don't get caught up in all of these dream interpretations. The endresult of a Kundalini awakening is a total detachment from the mind's
entanglement. You must bypass the mind to be in the Now, the present
moment, and draw energy from the field of pure potentiality. One day, these
things will mean absolutely nothing to you from the big picture point of
view.
After my initial Kundalini awakening, I remember seeing many
mystical visions with all kinds of symbols. Now they are gone, but so is
most visual, involuntary thought altogether. I sense things intuitively, as my
consciousness has elevated above fear. Remember this when it comes to the

awakening, "All things dissolve and resolve into all other things." What you
see now, you won't even remember years from now.
I feel fragile, vulnerable and my emotional state is constantly up and
down. I have anxiety and paranoia, and I need help. I’m not sure if
doctors can help me with anything related to Kundalini, but I don’t know
who else to turn to. What should I do?
No mental health professionals can help you with mental and
emotional problems that you're facing from an awakened Kundalini. They
will be eager to treat you medically, which you do not want. I went to see a
psychiatrist who apparently "knew" about the Kundalini at one point in
time. During the visit, I learned that she didn't know anything since one can
only truly know about the Kundalini if they have some personal experience.
It was a waste of my time and money, and most of all, it resulted in
disappointment. False hope can have very adverse effects in this process
since it can make you give up even faster than you usually would be
inclined to do.
If you are in a fragile state, be your own doctor and your personal
Saviour. With the Kundalini, please don't put your faith in other people's
hands unless those people have had the awakening themselves. If you need
comforting, listen to some Self-help talks. A Kundalini awakening will also
awaken the guru within, the Higher Self. Now is the time to learn to trust
yourself and be your own guide and teacher.
Mental issues, anxiety, and paranoia are common for people in your
situation. We've all been through it. Find something that calms you down
and makes you happy, which gives you an escape from the mental turmoil.
Find a hobby that occupies your body, mind and Soul. Write, paint, go for
walks, do something inspiring. If you focus on negativity, you will get
negativity in return. It will help if you don't focus on the mental issues as
they are temporary.
If you see a medical professional about this, you might feel worse
afterwards since they will throw around words like chronic anxiety, bipolar,
and schizophrenic. The symptoms exhibited by an active Kundalini might
be similar, but that doesn't mean that you have the ailment itself. Unlike
unawakened people diagnosed with these diseases, we go through these

challenges and emerge on the other side, stronger and more refined. It is
just a matter of time and patience.
One thing I always learned is to follow my own drumbeat. Listen to
the voice inside, and don't let others tell you what's happening. You guide
your narrative. Disregard what others are saying about what you are going
through. You know the truth deep inside of you, so start listening. You are
fine! It is just the Ego scaring you since it knows it is losing its power over
the consciousness. Your True Self lives in silence, a place of no thought!
I feel immense pressure from my forehead up to the top of my head,
and my thoughts are uncontrollable. I feel like I’m going crazy like my
brain is broken. What can I do to find balance?
If you have a buildup of energy at Sahasarara and Ajna Chakras, you
need to ground yourself. If you are overthinking and feel in touch with
anxiety and fear, grounding your energies will help you. Grounding will
silence your mind, allowing the fear to vanish. From personal experience, if
you have a lot of energy in your head, you will become introverted and
overthink. So try to focus on the emotional aspect of the Self by getting in
touch with your feelings, and the energy will balance itself out.
It helps to focus on your Foot Chakras and especially on your
abdomen. By focusing on your abdomen, you neutralise the Air Element
(thoughts) and connect to the Water Element (emotions). Doing so will put
you in touch with your feelings and bring the energy down from your head.
As you send the energy into your belly, you will create a comfortable and
steady Fire in that area through breathing and meditation. Practice silent
meditation, and you should be able to feel the energy in different places
other than your head. Meditation is necessary to bring the energy down into
the abdomen and reconnect the Kundalini circuit.
I’ve been trying to rationalize and intellectualize my process, which
has gotten me nowhere. I understand that it’s time that I go beyond the
mind and my thoughts, but I don’t know how or where to start. Can you
offer any insight?
Instead of focusing on your thoughts, silence the mind to step outside
of yourself through meditation and controlled breathing. See yourself in the
third-person as you observe your physical body and facial gestures, and

become the Silent Witness in the Now, the present moment. By stepping
outside of yourself, you bypass the Ego to connect with the True Self, the
Holy Guardian Angel, through whom you can experience the Glory of God
and countless other Spiritual riches.
To help you get there, meditate on your Mind's Eye by focusing on
your eyebrow centre. Then, with open eyes, see the world outside and
inside simultaneously. At this point, you will see yourself as other people
see you. You can attain this experience through practice. It will slowly shift
your perception from being entangled in the illusion of the Ego and falling
prey to fear to becoming external and objective and taking part in God's
Kingdom of the Light that gives us love, truth, and wisdom.
This is what is meant when Adepts and Sages mention they have
attained the Unity of all things. Remember, you are merely a thought image
in the Mind of God. This World of Matter that our senses partake of is but
the Eternal Dream of God, and our power to think and dream allows us to
be Co-Creator with our Creator. Let those with ears hear this great
Universal truth.
Ever since my Kundalini awakened, it’s the only thing I want to talk
to others about. I want others to know and experience what I have. But
whenever I’ve opened up to anyone about my experiences, they either
didn’t understand or made me feel as if I was crazy. Should I just keep
this experience to myself from now on?
In terms of who you tell you had a Kundalini awakening, I will say to
share with 10% of the people in your life and don't share with the other
90%. Sharing by itself has expectations of being understood. The fact is that
not even 10% will understand, but they will at least believe you through
compassion and faith that you are telling them the truth. So if you want to
save yourself from a lot of disappointment, I recommend you keep the
experience to yourself in most instances.
If someone mentions Kundalini and knows about it, share your
experience with them. Even then, unless the person has had an awakening,
they will have varied opinions about the topic and will be unable to follow
everything you are saying.
We relate to one another through past experience and common ground
as human beings. But, unfortunately, on the topic of Kundalini, most people

cannot connect. And if you want to avoid negativity and ignorance from
others, feel content with yourself and your own experience and lead by
example instead of telling them that you are in training to be the example.
When the Kundalini has finished its work with you, however many
years it takes, you will not have to say anything; others will know you are
unique and special. They may not understand everything you tell them since
a person often has to see something to believe it, but when you become the
Light source and lead the way, people will be intrigued and inspired by you.
Then, they will follow. After all, people are drawn to those that allow their
inner Light to shine because they subconsciously give them permission to
be themselves and do the same.
My experiences with the Kundalini have been like being in Heaven
at times while at other times, in Hell. However, I was taught to fear Hell
and long for Heaven in the afterlife with my religious upbringing. But
now, having had these experiences in my daily life, I feel that it’s all
meaningless. Though I have had incredibly beautiful experiences, my
nihilism holds me back from wanting to share them with others. I’m lost
and confused. Any insight?
A human is a dual being partaking both of Heaven and Hell. Since we
have Free Will, how we exercise it aligns our consciousness with either of
them. The Kundalini is an energy that connects Heaven and Hell so that
humanity can partake of both in our frail state. Focusing on the Hell aspect,
we become participants in it. Conversely, when we focus on Heaven, Hell
dissolves into nothingness as our consciousness becomes elevated.
Hell is produced by the Lunar Light, which reflects the Light of the
Sun; hence it is illusory. However, Heaven is the Light of the Sun itself. It is
Immortal, ineffable, and infinite. It speaks the truth and lives in
righteousness. On the other hand, Hell exists only as a fragment of the
imagination. It is not the imagination in totality since that belongs to
Heaven, but a mere reflection of it. Fear is only a reflection of the Light of
the Sun but is not the Light in and of itself. Only when humans choose to be
in Hell do they partake of it, according to how much fear energy binds them
to it.
By sharing theories, experiences and explanations with others, we are
on a quest for knowledge. Knowledge is power, or more importantly, the

power of truth, which is an antithesis to fear and Hell. Truth is Light and
love. It is Heaven. Beings that speak the truth according to their level of
evolution are Beings of Light. Sharing through loving-kindness makes them
partakers of the Heaven that is their birthright.
Nihilism is created by baseless theories that life is meaningless
because one has drawn themselves away from the Light through pessimism
and selfishness. Once the fruits of Heaven escape a person, many turn to
despair as they try to make sense of things while choosing to remain
ignorant of the truth and take accountability for their thoughts and actions.
Nihilism requires one to take a good look at themselves with an open
heart and mind and curb their pride long enough to see that a change in
needed to get back on track. It requires us to take responsibility for our
reality so that we can continue to grow and Spiritually evolve. Nihilism is
often a step in the journey when the darkness becomes stronger than the
Light. However, it should never be a final destination.
We are all here to learn from one another. There is ever-present the
duality of Heaven and Hell since both exist as relative concepts. However,
only one of them is Eternal and Infinite, and that one is the higher truth
between the two. Focusing on Hell keeps one within the Mental Body
sheath where this duality is apparent.
Learning the Principles of Light and love, including Self-love, will
enable you to recognize the truth of the Unity of all things and induce
silence of mind. Through silence, you can remove yourself from the
clutches of the Mental Body so that your consciousness can enter the
Spiritual Body. Since the Spiritual Body partakes of Archetypes, you will
be enabled to recognise the truth without duality, which is that we are all
sparks of the one source of Light, the Sun. Love is what binds us; truth
keeps us going, while justice brings us Eternal glory. Wisdom feeds the
Soul, and any intellectual mumbo-jumbo becomes like leaves in the wind.
I keep having dreams of giant dragons. Sometimes they appear
snake-like in their movements, and they hiss and attack me. They are so
powerful that I don’t even fight back. Is there any meaning to this?
Dragons are the symbol of the Kundalini in the Chinese tradition. As
the Kundalini is in movement while you sleep, two things are apparent that
are impacting your imagination: first is the sound of the energy flowing

within you as a mild buzzing or hissing sound heard inside your body. The
second is the symbol of this energy from the collective unconscious, like a
snake or Dragon, projected into your imagination.
The Dragon attacking you is a good thing since it means that the
Kundalini is in overdrive, infusing your Body of Light with often intense
jolts of energy. It also means that your Ego is being worked on, which is a
sign of transformation. Going with the vision in your dream and not
fighting it means your Ego accepts the Kundalini transformation process.
Be neutral as this is happening and accept the images, irrespective of how
scary they may seem in retrospect. Induce courage to continue surrendering
yourself to this process, and you will emerge on the other side as a more
refined Spiritual Being.
It is not uncommon also to see different symbolic elements in your
dreams as the Kundalini is working through your Chakras. For example,
when working on optimising your Water Chakra, Swadhisthana, you may
see different bodies of water, like oceans, seas, and lakes present.
Conversely, when Manipura is being targeted, an influx of the Fire Element
will be present, colouring your dreams with scenes of fire and flame. So
you see, what you dream about is symbolic of the energy changes
happening within your Aura and its impact on your imagination.
What can I do to awaken my Kundalini? Is there a method I can use
to facilitate this experience?
Although there is no sure-fire method to awaken the Kundalini,
engaging in Yogic practices like the ones presented in this book can prepare
the mind, body, and Soul for a Kundalini awakening to occur. The same
applies to the practice of Ceremonial Magick and following a regimen like
the Spiritual Alchemy Programs presented in The Magus. Also, the use of
Spiritual Healing modalities like Crystals, Tuning Forks, Aromatherapy,
and Tattvas work on cleansing and tuning the Chakras, which can cause a
Kundalini awakening. So, you see, prioritizing your Spiritual Evolution and
being proactive by implementing a regular Spiritual practice in your life is
the only thing you can do to bring yourself closer to this goal.
A Kundalini awakening usually happens unexpectedly, so you cannot
know when it will happen, but you can control what you do to make it
happen. Since it is such a monumental experience, the Soul must be ready

for it, which generally requires preparation over many lifetimes. It would be
impossible for me to ascertain exactly where you are in your Soul
progression; only your Higher Self knows that. But by focusing on being a
good person with strong morals and values ensures that you are on the right
path. Practice loving-kindness with yourself and others and be honest at all
times. Once you walk in the Light, you allow the Light to infuse into your
consciousness and awaken the Kundalini. A Kundalini awakening is just the
next step for your Soul to take to evolve and the most important one since it
liberates it from the body, completing its mission here on Earth.

EPILOGUE
In the beginning, was the White Light. All-Encompassing. Infinite.
Without beginning and end. The Mind of the All. Pure Spiritual
Consciousness. Then, this First Mind, which is energy and Force, created the
Second Mind to generate Forms. The All, being One, divided itself into Two
since all Creation requires the separation or division of its original substance.
The All could not experience its power and potential until it created a polar
opposite. Hence, the White Light generated the darkness of space.
The White Light also created Stars, whose groupings formed
Constellations and Galaxies that make up the whole of the Universe. Now
the All can manifest different worlds and living things—Souls that contain
the characteristics of the All. Souls contain the Light since they are of the
Light. However, they also contain the darkness since they partake of the
Universe—the World of Matter floating in the darkness of space.
All Forms and living things in existence are made of the thought-stuff
of the All. They are not inseparable from the All but are a part of it, only
they are in the act of the All's experience, embedded in Time and Space. The
experience and the experiencer are One; however, their separation is but an
illusion. While Matter is on one end of the spectrum, as the densest
manifestation of the All, the effect, the cause is the White Light that vibrates
so high that it is invisible to the senses, yet it interpenetrates all of existence.
The primary function of the Stars is to generate Light into the darkness
of space. The iris of the Sun is a portal into the other side of reality, the
White Light of the First Mind. The Stars birthed all living things in the
Universe since every organic being has Soul and consciousness. And the
Soul is nothing more than a spark of Light from its respective Sun. The
Ancients called the Sun "Sol," which is the origin of the word Soul as the
essence of a living thing.
The Suns of the Universe attracted nearby Planets to create Solar
Systems. There are billions of Solar Systems with trillions of Planets in the
Universe. The Suns made livable environments on certain Planets that orbit
them so they could cultivate Souls. However, only some Planets were chosen
for this task.
In our Solar System, the only Planet that can harbour life is Earth. Our
Sun then, through its Light, created all life on Earth. It nourishes it with its

heat and Pranic energy. So you see, the ultimate purpose of all the Stars in
the Universe is to harbour Souls. A Soul was never born, and it will never
die. Once the Soul has learned the lessons of the Solar System it incarnated
on, it transfers its spark from one Sun to another at the time of physical
death, continuing its evolutionary journey through the Universe.
As the human Soul becomes implanted in the physical body at birth, it
becomes locked to it. The Soul keeps reincarnating on Planet Earth until its
evolution reaches critical mass, resulting in its release from the body in a
given lifetime. The lessons of this Solar System relate to the full activation
of the Seven Chakras, which can only be achieved by awakening the
Kundalini and raising it to the Crown. When the human energy system
becomes optimized, the Soul will no longer need to reincarnate on Planet
Earth, but its next life will be on a new Planet in a different Solar System
somewhere in the Universe.
Our ultimate purpose on Planet Earth is to fully awaken the Kundalini
and liberate the Soul from the body. In doing so, we become the Sun of our
Solar System, fully activating the higher powers of the Light within us.
These higher powers are expressed through the Planets that orbit the Sun,
corresponding with the Seven Chakras in their fully activated state. Thus, as
you can see, a full Kundalini awakening enables us to experience the totality
of our energy potential here on Earth in the present incarnation.
Once we raise the Kundalini to the Crown, we unite our consciousness
with the Cosmic Consciousness of the White Light and the First Mind. We
then begin to participate in Infinity that stretches out to the furthest reaches
of the Universe, unlocking psychic gifts that enable us to transcend Time and
Space. We can see, feel, hear, touch, smell, and taste things at a distance
since the Three-Dimensional World no longer limits our consciousness.
Instead, we become elevated to the Fourth Dimension, the Dimension of
Vibration, or energy.
One of the essential gifts of a full Kundalini awakening is activating the
Body of Light and optimising one's toroidal energy field—the Merkaba. This
geometric structure becomes the Soul's vehicle of consciousness that enables
Interdimensional and Interplanetary travel. The Soul can leave the body at
will through the Body of Light and the Merkaba. It can now travel via our
Sun into other Suns in the Universe because the individual is now One with
the First Mind. This is the origin of Astral Projection which is the conscious
projection of the Soul into different realms and Planes of consciousness.

However, when this experience happens during sleep, unconsciously, it is
called Lucid Dreaming.
Although the full Kundalini awakening and the activation of the Body
of Light is a one-time event, the Spiritual transformation process that ensues
can take a few dozen years or more. We must overcome the individual
Karma before reaching the final frontier in human consciousness, the Fifth
Dimension of Love and Light. Never forget, to become pure and worthy
vessels for the Light, the Chakras must be optimized and tuned to perfection.
With that in mind, I hope that I have given you the keys in this book to
achieve this task. Whether you have already awakened the Kundalini or are
still in the process of learning and preparing for this experience, you now
know every element and facet of the Kundalini awakening process and the
Spiritual transfiguration that follows. Therefore, use Serpent Rising as a
manual for the different Spiritual practices presented herein, and continue to
work on your Chakras, preparing your Soul for Ascension.

Figure 164: Human Energy Potential Optimisation
In closing, it has been my pleasure sharing everything I have learned on
my seventeen-year journey of living with awakened Kundalini. Serpent
Rising: The Kundalini Compendium has been an incredible journey of
discovery for me as well, connecting the dots and building on the framework
of the evolving Kundalini science. My final advice for you is to take to heart
everything you read about in this book and get excited about your future.
The Kundalini is your gift from the Creator; don't squander it by wasting
time on distractions that don't serve you anymore. Instead, focus your energy
on fulfilling your ultimate mission on this Planet, and ill see you on the other
side.

APPENDIX

SUPPLEMENTARY TABLES
TABLE 6: The Seven Ancient Planets and their Correspondences

Planets

Saturn

Elemental
Affinity

Earth;

Expressions/Powers

Karma, Truth,

Feels like Earth Wisdom, Structure,
of Air

Discipline, Intuition

Gemstones

Tuning
Fork Hz

Diamonds,
Smoky Quartz

Oils (Advanced
List)
Myrrh,

Jet Black
Onyx,

Essential

295.7

Patchouli,
Cassia, Cypress,
Spikenard,
Mimosa
Anise,
Clove, Hyssop,

Water;
Jupiter

Mercy, Abundance,

Feels like

Unconditional Love,

Water of Fire

Morals, Ethics

Sapphire,
Lapis Lazuli,
Turquoise,
Aquamarine

Nutmeg, Clary
Dandelion,
367.16 Sage,
Cedarwood,
Sarsaparilla,
Cumin,
Opoponax
Ginger,

Fire; Feels
Mars

like Earth of
Fire

Ambition, Drive,
Renewal, Action,
Survival, Competition,
Passion, Willpower

Ruby,
Garnet, Red
Agate,
Bloodstone, Red
Coral

Basil, Black
Pepper,

289.44 Peppermint,
Tobacco,
Dragon’s Blood,
Wormwood,
Pine

Amber,
Self-Identity,
Sun
(Sol)

Air; Feels Healing, Vitality,
like Air of Fire Courage, Creativity,
Inspiration, Imagination

Tiger’s Eye,
Gold Topaz,
Goldstone,
Carnelian,
Zircon,
Sunstone

Chamomile,
Juniper,
Frankincense,

252.44 Marigold,
Rosemary,
Cinnamon,
Saffron, Cedar,
Orange, Lime

Venus

Fire; Feels

Desire, Creative

Emerald,

442.46

Rose, Red

like Water of

Expressions, Romantic

Jade,

Sandalwood,

Earth

Love, Friendship,

Aventurine,

Ylang-Ylang,

Sensuality

Malachite, Rose

Cardamom,

Quartz, Green

Geranium, Lilac,

Agate, Peridot

Vetiver,
Spearmint,
Violet, Vanilla
Bean, Plumeria,
Valerian
Lavender,

Orange

Lemongrass,

Sapphire,
Water;
Mercury Feels like
Water of Air

Logic, Reason,
Communication, Intellect,
Learning

Lemon Verbena,

Orange Spinel,
Tourmaline,
Imperial Topaz,

Yellow

282.54 Sandalwood,
Orange, Mace,

Citrine, Fire

Peppermint,

Opal,

Orange

Amazonite

Bergamot
Jasmine,
Camphor,

Moon
(Luna)

Air; Feels

Feelings, Emotions,

like Earth of

Illusions, Caprice,

Water

Fertility, Clairvoyance

Moonstone,
Pearl, Beryl

Eucalyptus,

420.88 White

Sandalwood,
Willow, Lemon,
Myrrh, Lily
Cypress,

Black
Earth

Earth

Stability, Grounding, Tourmaline,
Practicality

Obsidian,

272.2

Mugwort,
Oleander,
Patchouli,

Hematite

Vervain, Vetiver

TABLE 7: The Twelve Zodiac and their Correspondences
Ruling
Zodiac

Planet, Sub-

Expressions/Powers

Gemstones

Element
Aries

Mars

Creative Energy,

(Fire), Fire

Drive, Initiative,

of Fire

Enthusiasm, Competition,

Bloodstone,
Carnelian,

Tuning
Fork Hz

Essential
Oils (Basic
List)
Black

144.72 Rosemary,
Pepper,

Courage, Dynamism,

Diamond, Garnet,

Ginger, Basil,

Confidence

Red Jasper, Ruby

Peppermint,
Mandarin,
Orange

Venus
Taurus

Amber,

Ylang

Patience, Sensuality, Rose Quartz,

Ylang, Rose

Persistence,

Blood Coral,

Vetiver,

(Earth), Air

Determination,

Golden Topaz,

of Earth

Sensitivity, Practicality,

Emerald,

Sandalwood,

Conventionality

Sapphire,

Melissa,

Turquoise

Marjoram

221.23 Geranium,

Aquamarine,
Intellect, Learning,

Agate,

Mercury Communication, Humour Chrysoprase,
Gemini

Bergamot,
Fennel,

141.27 Lavender,

(Air), Water

Analyzing, Adaptability,

Pearl,

of Air

Versatility,

Moonstone,

Chamomile,

Nonconformism

Citrine, White

Peppermint

Sapphire
Fennel,
Moon
Cancer

(Water), Fire
of Water

Tenacity, Sensitivity,
Emotionality, Intuition,
Sympathy, Protective
Instinct, Empathy

Moonstone,
Ruby, Emerald,
Pearl

Juniper,

210.42 Lavender,
Jasmine, Clary
Sage,
Eucalyptus

Sun
Leo

(Fire), Air of
Fire

(Earth),
Water of
Earth

Libra

Creativity, Authority,
Vitality, Generosity,
Affection

Mercury
Virgo

Charisma, Ambition,

Venus

Discrimination,
Analyzing, Reliability,
Diligence, Practicality,
Adaptability,
Independence, Teaching
Harmony, Justice,

Amber,

Rosemary,

Tourmaline,

Frankincense,

Carnelian, Ruby,
Sardonyx, Onyx,

Lime,

Golden Topaz

Cinnamon

Blue
Sapphire, Pink
Jasper, Carnelian,
Jade, Moss
Agate, Turquoise,
Zircon
Lapis

(Air), Fire of Self-Expression,

Lazuli, Opal,

Air

Diamond,

Diplomacy, Romance,

126.22 Myrrh, Lemon,
Melissa,
Myrtle,

141.27 Patchouli,
Sandalwood,
Lavender
Geranium,
Tea
221.23 Fennel,
Tree, Rose,

Sensuality, Sociability,

Emerald, Rose

Cardamom,

Shrewdness

Quartz, Peridot

Melissa

Regeneration,
Mars
Scorpio

(Water), Air
of Water

Aquamarine,

Patchouli,

Sexuality,

Black Obsidian,

Rose,

Transformation, Justice,

Garnet, Agate,

Passion, Loyalty, Power,

Topaz, Beryl,

Independence,

Apache Tears,

Jasmine, Clary

Magnetism

Coral

Sage

140.25
(Pluto)

Geranium,
Ginger,

Clary
Jupiter
Sagittarius (Fire), Water
of Fire

Optimism, Love of
Freedom, Cheer, Honesty,
Philosophy, Charity,
Inspiration, Exploration

Sage, Clove,
Turquoise,

Hyssop,

Topaz, Sapphire,

183.58 Bergamot,

Amethyst, Ruby

Cedarwood,
Eucalyptus,
Cardamom

Saturn
Capricorn (Earth), Fire
of Earth

Organization,
Conscientiousness,

Onyx, Smoky

Pragmatism, Ambition,

Quartz, Garnet,

Aquarius

Vetiver,

147.85 Eucalyptus,
Geranium,

Conservatism, Discipline Agate
Intuition, Creativity,

Saturn

Myrrh,

Ruby, Black

Spirituality,

Neroli,

Garnet,
Sugilite,

(Air), Air of Independence,

Amethyst, Blue

Air

Sapphire, Moss

Innovation, Originality,

Sandalwood

Meditation, Humanitarian Agate, Opal

Myrrh,

207.36 Sandalwood,
Violet Leaf,
(Uranus) Lavender,
Lemon

Amethyst,
Jupiter
Pisces

(Water),
Water of
Water

Deep Emotions,

Bergamot,

Jade,

Clove,

Intuition, Imagination,

Aquamarine,

Compassion, Empathy,

Rock Crystal,

Ethics, Sympathy,

Bloodstone,

Humour

Diamond,

Tree, Clary

Sapphire

Sage

211.44
(Neptune)

Geranium,
Myrrh,
Cypress, Tea

GLOSSARY OF SELECTED TERMS
Note: The following is a selection of terms that are either undefined in
the original body of text or require further definition. Use this section to
help further your knowledge of the given subjects. Since this book generally
deals with Eastern Spirituality, most of the terms presented here are from
the Western Mysteries.
Adam Kadmon: An abstract concept referring to the Yechidah, the
Kether Sephira that filters into the Chiah (Chokmah) and Lesser
Neschamah (Binah) to form the Greater Neschamah, the True Self and part
of us that belongs to the Supernals. In The Zohar, Adam Kadmon is the
"Heavenly Man," the large organic Spiritual body in which each human
being is considered a single cell, maybe less. In terms of the Four Worlds of
the Qabalah, Adam Kadmon represents the First World of Archetypes,
Atziluth, the World of Primal Fire. Thus, Adam Kadmon essentially refers
to the Divine Light, the Freudian Super-Ego, or the Higher Self from the
Supernals.
Ain Soph Aur: The Three Veils of Negative Existence. This term is
used in the Qabalah to describe the Source of Creation. In the literal sense,
Ain translates as "Nothing," while Ain Soph is "Infinity". And finally, Ain
Soph Aur is "Limitless or Eternal Light". Thus, in the Qabalah, the term
Ain Soph Aur is often used in reference to the Infinite White Light.
Aleister Crowley: A British occultist, poet, novelist, and Ceremonial
Magi, who was one of the original members of the Hermetic Order of the
Golden Dawn. After leaving the Order, Crowley founded the religion of
Thelema in the early 20th century, identifying himself as the prophet of the
Aeon of Horus, which coincided with that period in time. Crowley publicly
referred to himself as the "Great Beast 666," as he sought to challenge the
taboos in the Christian-driven, restrictive Elizabethan society he lived in,
which is why he got a bad reputation over the years. However, his
contribution to the occult world is indispensable, and he opened many doors
for future seekers everywhere.
Alpha State: Otherwise called the "Hypnagogic State" or "Trance
State." The Alpha State of brain activity occurs between being awake with
mental activity (Beta State) and sleep (Theta State). This state is reached

when your brain waves slow down to between 8 and 12 Hz, which is
common when you daydream or dream (at night). We can consciously
induce the Alpha State through meditation, hypnosis, or the use of Spiritual
healing modalities. Being in this state will heighten your memory recall and
intuition while reducing anxiety. People who can operate from the Alpha
State during ordinary waking consciousness can control their reality since
their connection with their Higher Self is greater. Therefore, they can use
the Universal Laws consciously and with intent.
Angels: Positive thought senders that exist inside and outside one's
energy field, the Aura. Angels are objective entities or Intelligences that
exist outside the Self and become contracted within the Aura when we
choose by Free Will to listen to them and do their bidding. Angels feed on
love energy, like their counterparts, the Demons, feed on fear energy.
Angels are subservient to God- the Creator. Angelic energy is the source of
human virtues, as Demonic energy is the source of human vices.
Archetypes: Primordial structural elements of the human psyche.
Archetypes are original models after which other similar things are
patterned. They are Universal, meaning that all humans partake in them.
Archetypes give us the mental foundation on which to build our realities.
They are found in the highest world, Atziluth, the World of Primal Fire in
the Qabalah.
Binah: The third Sephira on the Tree of Life, atop the Pillar of
Severity. Binah is the Great Mother and the Sea of Consciousness that
contains all Forms in existence. It represents the feminine aspect of the Self,
the highest expression of the Water Element. Through Binah, the Spirit
energy impregnates ideas into our minds. Thus, it represents the state of
consciousness that governs inner faculties like intuition and clairvoyance.
Binah corresponds with Ajna Chakra, our psychic centre that provides
empathy and telepathy. Binah is the receptive, passive aspect of the Self, the
Understanding (Binah's title) that can comprehend the wisdom of Chokmah.
Its colour is black, corresponding with the Planet Saturn on the Tree of Life;
the Planet of faith, Karma, and time, all aspects of Binah.
Ceremonial Magick: Synonymous with Western Ritual Magick. A
series of rites involving the incantation (vibration) of Divine names of
power, usually combined with symbolic tracings of geometric symbols, like
the Pentagram or Hexagram, within the practitioner's Magickal circle. The
purpose of Ceremonial Magick, like with other Spiritual Healing practices,

is the attunement of Chakras for Spiritual Evolution. Popularized by the
Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, Ceremonial Magick forms a branch of
Hermeticism. The end-goal of using Ceremonial Magick is achieving
Enlightenment.
Chesed: The fourth Sephira on the Tree of Life, situated below Chesed
on the Pillar of Mercy. It represents a state of consciousness that governs
the inner faculties or expressions like unconditional love, compassion, and
memory. For this reason, Chesed's title is "Mercy." Chesed allows us to
build morals and ethics as it cultivates wisdom. Chesed has an affinity with
the Water Element, and it corresponds with the Planet Jupiter. Chesed is the
Spiritualized Sacral Chakra, Swadhisthana, because of its connection to the
Supernals through the Tarot Path of The Hierophant on the Tree of Life.
Chokmah: The second Sephira on Tree of Life, atop the Pillar of
Mercy. As the active Spirit energy, Chokmah represents the state of
consciousness where we can discover our True Will. It is the Great Father
energy and the masculine aspect of the Self, the highest expression of the
Fire Element. Thus, it is the Sephira through which our Higher Self, or
Holy Guardian Angel, communicates to us through Wisdom (Chokmah's
title). The colour of Chokmah is grey. The Zodiac is the physical
manifestation of Chokmah since the Stars serve to channel the
unmanifested White Light of Kether. Chokmah functions through the
Mind's Eye Chakra, along with Binah.
Dark Night of the Soul, the: A period of desolation that an individual
undergoes when rapidly evolving Spiritually. All sense of consolation is
removed during this time, creating a type of existential crisis. Before
transforming Spiritually, the individual must face the dark side full-on and
embrace the mental and emotional turmoil. It is not uncommon for the
individual to isolate themselves from other people during this time and shed
many tears as they purge old emotions. However, after this tumultuous
period is complete, the clutches of the Lower Self will have lessened,
aligning the consciousness more with the vibration of the Higher Self. The
Dark Night of the Soul is a necessary phase of suffering on the path towards
Enlightenment that is not a one-time process but is generally encountered
many times on one's Spiritual Evolution journey.
Daath: As the hidden, eleventh Sephira on the Tree of Life, Daath is
the "Great Chasm," or the "Abyss" that divides the Supernals from all
manifested Creation. Fittingly, it corresponds with the Throat Chakra,

Vishuddhi, which separates the Spirit from the lower Four Elements.
Through Daath, we enter into Hell or the Underworld, the opposite pole in
the mind that gave rise to the Ego, the negative part of the Self. As such,
Daath represents the "death" of the Ego that is necessary for our
consciousness to rise to the Supernals. Daath is known as the "Sphere of
Knowledge" since knowledge allows us to transcend our bodies and attune
our consciousness to Higher Realms.
Deity, a: A supernatural Being of Divine origin. This word is often
used in polytheistic religions instead of God or Goddess. In Ancient
traditions, a Deity is a Being with greater powers than those of ordinary
humans but who interacts with them, most often to enlighten them
somehow and further their evolution. Monotheistic religions have only one
Deity, whom they accept as God-the Creator, while polytheistic religions
accept multiple Deities.
Enochian Magick: The crowning jewel of the Hermetic Order of the
Golden Dawn’s system of Magick. This Inner Order practice should only be
undertaken when Spiritual Alchemy with the Elements has been completed.
In The Magus, Enochian Magick refers to "Spiritual Alchemy Program III,"
which implements the use of the Nineteen Enochian Keys or Calls that
pertain to the Five Elements. Enochian Magick is a complete system of
Magick that stands apart from other Ceremonial Magick ritual exercises in
The Magus but is part of the whole as well.
Freemasonry: Freemasonry, or Masonry, refers to the oldest fraternal
organisation in the world. Contrary to popular belief inspired by conspiracy
theories, the true purpose of being a Freemason is improving your moral
nature and building character through a course of self-development. The
three degrees of Freemasonry in the Blue Lodge are Entered Apprentice,
Fellowcraft, and Master Mason, which the initiate enters into ceremonially.
Afterwards, the initiate is taught the meaning of the symbols pertaining to
their degree ceremony, which is the traditional method of passing down
sacred teachings.
Geburah: The fifth Sephira on the Tree of Life situated below Binah
on the Pillar of Severity. Titled "Severity" or "Justice," Geburah
corresponds with the Fire Element and the individual willpower that gives
us motivation, determination, and drive. As the source of our
competitiveness, Geburah can also make us aggressive and angry when
unbalanced by its opposite, Chesed. Geburah is the Spiritualized Solar

Plexus Chakra, Manipura, because of its connection to the Supernals
through the Tarot Path of the Chariot on the Tree of Life.
Golden Dawn, the: Ancient Western Mysteries School that teaches its
students the Qabalah, Hermeticism, Tarot, Astrology, Geomancy, Egyptian
and Christian Mysteries, and Ceremonial Magick (including Enochian
Magick). There are many Golden Dawn Orders globally, most of which
teach the same course material. The Golden Dawn course material was
made public by Israel Regardie in "The Golden Dawn", first published in
1937. The original Golden Dawn Order was called the Hermetic Order of
the Golden Dawn, established in 1888 by a group of Freemasons, the most
notable being Samuel Liddell MacGregor Mathers. Today, most of the
Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn offshoots are called by variations of
that same name.
Hod: The eighth Sephira on the Tree of Life, at the bottom of the Pillar
of Severity, whose title is "Splendour." Hod's state of consciousness
pertains to the inner faculties of intelligence, particularly logic and reason.
This Sphere has an affinity with the Water Element, although the Fire
Element is involved as well in its function as is the Air Element. As such,
Hod expresses through the three Chakras of Swadhisthana, Manipura, and
Anahata. It corresponds with the Planet Mercury and is the colour orange.
Hod represents a lesser form of the energy of Chesed, mediated through
Tiphareth. The Ego often uses Hod to deduce reality and make future
decisions. In the Golden Dawn system, Hod corresponds with the Practicus
grade.
Hebrew Letters, the: Twenty-Two Letters that are part of the
Qabalistic philosophy but stand apart as their own Spiritual system. Each
letter is a symbol and a number with many ideas associated with it. These
ideas bring forth certain Archetypes that are resonant with the energy of the
Major Arcana of the Tarot. The three Mother Letters (primary) correspond
with the three Elements of Air, Water, and Fire, while the seven Double
Letters (secondary) correspond with the Seven Ancient Planets. Finally, the
twelve Simple Letters (tertiary) correspond with the Twelve Zodiac.
Hermes Trismegistus: A historical figure who lived during the oldest
dynasties of Egypt. Known as the "Scribe of the Gods," or the "Master of
Masters," Hermes was the founder of Hermeticism and is considered the
father of occult wisdom. All the fundamental teachings in all esoteric and
religious sects can be traced back to Hermes. His wisdom and knowledge

about the mysteries of the Universe and life were so great that the Egyptians
deified him as one of their Gods, calling him Thoth-the God of Wisdom.
Greeks revered him also and made him one of their twelve Olympian Gods,
also calling him Hermes. As the Romans syncretized their religion with the
Greek religion, they referred to Hermes as Mercury. Hermes was considered
the greatest World Teacher, and a few Adepts that came after him, including
Jesus Christ, are considered by many scholars to be his reincarnation. It is
believed that the Spirit of Hermes incarnates approximately every 2000
years as the World Teacher to enlighten the world in Spiritual, religious,
philosophical, and psychological areas by introducing a modern language to
teach about the Spirit and God, reconciling all divergent viewpoints.
Hermeticism: A philosophical, religious, and esoteric tradition based
primarily on the teachings of Hermes Trismegistus, which includes
Astrology, Alchemy, and the Principles of Creation as described in The
Kybalion. The philosophical aspects of Hermeticism are contained in the
"Hermetica," comprised of the Corpus Hermeticum (also known as The
Divine Pymander) and The Emerald Tablet of Hermes, the key of Alchemy.
Hermeticism is an invisible science that encompasses the energies of our
Solar System concerning human beings. Hermetic writings have greatly
influenced the Western esoteric tradition, namely the Golden Dawn Order.
Kether: The first and highest Sephira on Tree of Life, atop the Middle
Pillar. Relates to the White Light Principle (Ain Soph Aur) since it acts as a
channel of it into the lower Chakras. Its colour is white, representing the
Light that contains the seven colours of the rainbow—the Major Chakras.
Kether corresponds with Sahasrara Chakra and shares the same title—the
Crown. It represents the transcendental state of consciousness that is
beyond the duality of the mind. Kether is also our gateway to the
Transpersonal Chakras above the Crown. As the Divine Spirit, Kether is the
highest expression of the Air Element. It represents the Monad, the
singularity, and the highest conception of the Godhead.
Kingdom of Heaven, the: Synonymous with the Kingdom of God.
The Kingdom of Heaven is one of the essential elements in the teachings of
Jesus Christ that refers to the fulfilment of God's Will on Earth. It is a state
of mind akin to Christ Consciousness, where there has been a descent of
Spirit into Matter, and they are now One. In Christian teachings, one must
be Resurrected, metaphorically speaking, to enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. As every human's destiny, this lofty state of higher consciousness

can be attained once the Kundalini energy rises to the Crown, fully
activating the Body of Light and optimizing one's toroidal energy field
(Merkaba). Following the Spiritual transformation, the individual will have
their head in Heaven and their feet upon the Earth, as a God-human.
Major Arcana, the: Twenty-Two Trumps of the Tarot Cards.
Corresponds with the Twenty-Two paths on the Tree of Life and the
Twenty-Two Hebrew Letters. The Major Arcana represent the Archetypal
energies in transit between the ten Sephiroth on the Tree of Life. They
correspond with the three main Elements of Air, Fire, Water, the Twelve
Zodiac, and the Seven Ancient Planets, comprising the entirety of our Solar
System.
Malkuth: The tenth and lowest Sephira on the Tree of Life whose title
is "the Kingdom." As such, Malkuth relates to Gaia, the Planet Earth, and
the Physical World of Matter. It corresponds with Muladhara Chakra and
has an affinity with the Earth Element. Malkuth's colors are citrine, olive,
russet, and black, representing the three Elements of Air, Water, and Fire in
a denser form. In the Golden Dawn system, Malkuth corresponds with the
Zelator grade.
Mercury (Alchemical Principle): Within the Alchemical process,
Mercury is the transforming substance. Its role is to bring balance and
harmony between the other two Alchemical Principles—Sulfur and Salt.
Mercury is the Life Force, the Spirit energy. In the first stage, when it is
opposite to Sulfur, it takes on the fluidic, feminine Principle of
consciousness as the Great Mother—the Water Element. In the second
stage, once Sulfur has been extracted and returned yet again, it becomes
known as Philosophic Mercury, or the Secret Fire—the Spirit Element.
Philosophic Mercury is the substance that gives rise to the Philosopher's
Stone, the goal of the Alchemist.
Middle Pillar, the: Otherwise called the Pillar of Balance or Pillar of
Mildness on the Tree of Life. It is self-balancing while bringing equilibrium
to the other two Pillars—the Pillar of Mercy and Pillar of Severity. The
Middle Pillar brings unity to the many dualistic, contending forces in life. It
comprises the Sephiroth Kether, Daath, Tiphareth, Yesod, and Malkuth.
This term also relates to the Middle Pillar ritual exercise (from The Magus),
which is an invocation of Light meant to balance the psyche and aid in
Spiritual Evolution. The Middle Pillar represents the Air Element and is

grey in colour. It corresponds with the Sushumna Nadi in the Kundalini
system.
Netzach: Seventh Sephira on the Tree of Life along the Pillar of
Mercy. Titled "Victory," Netzach represents a state of consciousness dealing
with emotions, particularly desire and romantic love. Netzach has an
affinity with the Fire Element, although the Water Element is involved in its
expression and the Air Element. It expresses through the three Chakras of
Swadhisthana, Manipura, and Anahata, the same as Hod. Netzach, Hod and
Yesod, the Astral Triangle, are the three most commonly accessed Spheres
used by the average person. Netzach corresponds with the Planet Venus,
and its colour is green. In the Golden Dawn system, Netzach corresponds
with the Philosophus grade.
Nirvana: An Eastern term commonly associated with Jainism and
Buddhism. Represents a transcendental state of Being in which there is no
suffering nor desire, as the Self experiences Unity with the rest of the
world. In Indian religions, Nirvana is synonymous with Moksha or Mukti,
the release from the cycle of rebirth as pertains to the Law of Karma.
Nirvana signifies the alignment of individual consciousness with Cosmic
Consciousness as the final goal of all Spiritual traditions, religions, and
practices. A precursor to achieving Nirvana is awakening the Kundalini to
the Crown and attaining full Light Body activation. Nirvana implies that
one has reached Enlightenment. It is comparable with the other two Eastern
terms, Satori and Samadhi.
Philosopher’s Stone, the: A legendary Alchemical substance capable
of turning base metals (such as mercury) into gold or silver. Veiled to the
profane who only desired financial profit, this term has a hidden meaning
related to the most sought-after goal of Alchemy— Spiritual
transformation. Therefore, when you hear that someone has found the
Philosopher's Stone, it means they have completed the Great Work
(Spiritual Alchemy) and have become Enlightened.
Pillar of Mercy, the: The right Pillar on the Tree of Life comprising
the Sephiroth Chokmah, Chesed, and Netzach. The Pillar of Mercy is the
masculine, active, and positive Pillar otherwise called the Pillar of Force. It
represents the Water Element and is white in colour. In the Kundalini
system, the Pillar of Mercy corresponds with the Pingala Nadi.
Pillar of Severity, the: The left Pillar on the Tree of Life comprising
the Sephiroth Binah, Geburah, and Hod. It is the feminine, passive, and

negative Pillar otherwise called the Pillar of Form. It represents the Fire
Element and is black in colour. In the Kundalini system, the Pillar of
Severity represents the Ida Nadi.
Prima Materia: Otherwise called the "First Matter", it is the
primaeval substance regarded as the original material of the known
Universe. Synonymous with the Spirit as the first substance and the Source
of everything in existence. In Alchemy, the Prima Materia is the starting
material required for creating the Philosopher's Stone. It is the "Anima
Mundi"- the World Soul, the only vital force in the Universe.
Salt: The physical body that grounds and fixes the other two
Alchemical Principles, Mercury and Sulfur. It represents the crystallization
and hardening of all three Principles together. Salt is the vehicle of physical
manifestation and the Third Dimension of Time and Space expressed
through the Earth Element. Salt, Mercury, and Sulfur form the Trinity in
Alchemy.
Sex Magick: Any type of sexual activity used in a ceremonial or
ritualistic setting with clear underlying intent. The idea behind Sex Magick
is that sexual energy is a potent force that can be harnessed to magnetize the
Astral Realm and attract whatever one desires or to call in Deities from
various pantheons. One form of Sex Magick ritual is to use sexual arousal
or orgasm to visualise something you are trying to achieve or obtain. As
such, Sex Magick is like a battery for your willpower when performed with
an open heart and mind. However, if Sex Magick is practised with an
impure mind, it will only attract lower entities to feed on the sexual energy
being invoked. These lower entities can then attach themselves to you and
continue to feed on your sexual energy until cleared.
Spiritual Alchemy: In the same way as Alchemy deals with turning
base metals into gold, Spiritual Alchemy deals with transforming the
practitioner's energy and Enlightening them (infusing them with Light).
This can be achieved through Spiritual Healing modalities and practices,
including Yoga and Ceremonial Magick. Spiritual Alchemy requires
working with the Five Elements, which correspond with the Seven Chakras.
The goal of Spiritual Evolution is Illumination, as the individual
consciousness is exalted and united with Cosmic Consciousness. Through
this process, the individual establishes a link with the Higher Self or Holy
Guardian Angel, their God-Self. The Spirit Element must be integrated

within the Aura, which marks the completion of the Great Work and the
restoration of the Garden of Eden.
Sulfur: It is the Soul present in all living things in the Universe. It
comes from the Sun as the Light of God and is the masculine Principle, the
Great Father—the Fire Element. Alchemical transmutation's whole process
depends on the Principle of Sulfur and its proper application. Sulfur is the
vibrant, acidic, active, dynamic Principle. It serves to stabilize Mercury, out
of which it is extracted and into which it returns.
Tarot, the: A sacred art mainly used in Divination. The Tarot
comprises seventy-eight playing cards, divided into four suits of fourteen
cards each, plus Twenty-Two Trumps (Major Arcana). Tarot cards feature
incredible imagery containing timeless, esoteric wisdom. They have an
inextricable connection with the Qabalah and the Tree of Life, and they
serve as the key to the occult sciences and a road-map of the different
components of the human psyche. Thus, the Tarot is a complete and
intricate system used to describe the unseen, invisible forces that influence
the Universe.
Thirty Aethyrs: Concentric circles that interpenetrate and overlap one
another, thereby comprising the Aura layers. The Aethyrs are the Spiritual
components of the Cosmic Planes in the Enochian System. Each of the
Thirty Aethyrs carries a masculine and/or feminine sexual current which
can be invoked using the Nineteenth Enochian Key. The Thirty Aethyrs
work directly with the Ida and Pingala Nadis in the Kundalini system.
Tiphareth: The sixth Sephira on the Tree of Life along the Middle
Pillar, whose title is "Harmony" and "Beauty." It represents a state of
consciousness of inner faculties dealing with imagination and the
processing of thoughts and emotions. As the central Sephira on the Tree of
Life, Tiphareth is concerned with processing the energies of all the
Sephiroth, except Malkuth. Within occult knowledge, Tiphareth is known as
the Sphere of Spiritual Rebirth and Christ or Krishna Consciousness, where
Spirit and Matter become united as one. Tiphareth has an affinity with the
Air Element, although, since it corresponds with the Sun, it also has aspects
of Fire. Thus, the placement of Tiphareth is somewhere between Anahata
and Manipura Chakras, through which it expresses. Tiphareth's colour is
golden-yellow. In the Golden Dawn system, Tiphareth corresponds with
Adeptus Minor, the First Grade of the Second Order.

Yesod: The ninth Sephira on the Tree of Life along the Middle Pillar,
whose title is "Foundation," concerning the Astral blueprint of all things in
existence. Yesod represents the Astral Plane, the contact point for the Inner
Cosmic Planes. It represents a state of consciousness of the inner faculties
dealing with the Ego and its thoughts and impulses. Sexuality and the fears
of the subconscious mind are also expressed through Yesod. Its placement
is somewhere between Swadhisthana and Manipura Chakras, which it
works through. Yesod has an affinity with the Air Element, with aspects of
the Water Element. Its colour is violet-purple, and it corresponds with the
Moon Planet. In the Golden Dawn system, Yesod represents the Theoricus
Grade.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Note: The following are a list of books from my personal library that
served as resources and inspiration behind the present work. Every effort
has been made to trace all copyright holders of any material included in
this edition, whether companies or individuals. Any omission is
unintentional, and I will be pleased to correct any errors in future versions
of this book.

KUNDALINI
Arundale, G.S. (1997). Kundalini: An Occult Experience. Adyar,
Madras, India: The Theosophical Publishing House
Bynum, Bruce Edward (2012). Dark Light Consciousness. Rochester,
Vermont: Inner Traditions
Dixon, Jana (2008). Biology of Kundalini: Exploring the Fire of Life.
Lulu Online Publishing
Goswami, Shyam Sundar (1999). Layayoga: The Definitive Guide to
the Chakras and Kundalini. Rochester, Vermont: Inner Traditions
Khalsa, Gurmukh Kaur, with Ken Wilber, Swami Radha, Gopi
Krishna, and John White (2009). Kundalini Rising: Exploring the Energy of
Awakening. Boulder, Colorado: Sounds True, Inc.
Krishna, Gopi (1993). Living with Kundalini: The Autobiography of
Gopi Krishna. Boston, Massachusetts: Shambhala Publications Inc.
Krishna, Gopi (1988). Kundalini for the New Age: Selected Writings of
Gopi Krishna. Edited by Gene Kiefer. New York, New York: Bantam
Books
Krishna, Gopi (1997). Kundalini: The Evolutionary Energy in Man.
Boston, Massachusetts: Shambhala Publications Inc.
Krishna, Gopi (1975). The Awakening of Kundalini. New York, New
York: E. P. Dutton
Krishna, Gopi (1972). The Biological Basis of Religion and Genius.
New York, New York: Harper & Row Publishers
Mahajan, Yogi (1997). The Ascent. Delhi, India: Motilal Banarsidass
Publishers

Melchizedek, Drunvalo (2008). Serpent of Light: Beyond 2012. San
Francisco, California: Weiser Books
Mumford, Jonn (2014). A Chakra & Kundalini Workbook. Woodbury,
Minnesota: Llewellyn Publications
Paulson, Genevieve Lewis (2003). Kundalini and the Chakras. St.
Paul, Minnesota: Llewellyn Publications
Perring, Michael "Omdevaji" (2015). What on Earth is Kundalini?Book III. Varanasi, India: Pilgrims Publishing
Semple, J. J. (2007). Deciphering the Golden Flower: One Secret at a
Time. Bayside, California: Life Force Books
Swami, Om (2016). Kundalini: An Untold Story. Mumbai, India: Jaico
Publication House
Weor, Samael Aun (2020). Christ’s Will: Kundalini, Tarot, and the
Christification of the Human Soul. www.gnosticteachings.org: Glorian
Publishing
Weor, Samael Aun (2018). The Yellow Book: The Divine Mother,
Kundalini, and Spiritual Powers. www.gnosticteachings.org: Glorian
Publishing
White, John (1990). Kundalini: Evolution and Enlightenment. St. Paul,
Minnesota: Paragon House

ENERGY HEALING AND CHAKRAS
Bernoth, Bettina (2012). Auric Lights: Light is the Medicine of our
Future. CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform
Bettina, Bernoth (1995). Magical Auras. CreateSpace Independent
Publishing Platform
Burger, Bruce (1998). Esoteric Anatomy: The Body as Consciousness.
Berkeley, California: North Atlantic Books
Butler, W.E. (1987). How to Read the Aura, Practice Psychometry,
Telepathy and Clairvoyance. Rochester, Vermont: Destiny Books
Chia, Mantak (2008). Healing Light of the Tao: Foundational
Practices to Awaken Chi Energy. Rochester, Vermont: Destiny Books
Chia, Mantak (2009). The Alchemy of Sexual Energy: Connecting to
the Universe From Within. Rochester, Vermont: Destiny Books
Dale, Cyndi (2018). The Complete Book of Chakras: Your Definitive
Source of Energy Center Knowledge for Health, Happiness, and Spiritual

Evolution. Woodbury, Minnesota: Llewellyn Publications
Dale, Cyndi (2009). The Subtle Body: An Encyclopedia of Your
Energetic Anatomy. Boulder, Colorado: Sounds True, Inc.
Dale, Cyndi (2013). The Subtle Body Practice Manual: A
Comprehensive Guide to Energy Healing. Boulder, Colorado: Sounds True,
Inc.
Gerber, Richard, M.D. (2001). Vibrational Medicine: The 1#
Handbook of Subtle-Energy Therapies. Rochester, Vermont: Bear &
Company
Grey, Alex (2012). Net of Being. With Alyson Grey. Rochester,
Vermont: Inner Traditions International
Grey, Alex (1990). Sacred Mirrors: The Visionary Art of Alex Grey.
Rochester, Vermont: Inner Traditions International
Judith, Anodea (2006). Wheels of Life: A User’s Guide to the Chakra
System. Woodbury, Minnesota: Llewellyn Publications
Leadbeater, C.W. (1987). The Chakras. Wheaton, Illinois: The
Theosophical Publishing House
Lockhart, Maureen (2010). The Subtle Energy Body: The Complete
Guide. Rochester, Vermont: Inner Traditions
Ostrom, Joseph (2000). Auras: What they are and How to Read Them.
Hammersmith, London: Thorsons
Zink, Robert (2014). Magical Energy Healing: The Ruach Healing
Method. Rachel Haas co-author. Portland, Oregon: Law of Attraction
Solutions, LLC.

BRAIN AND BODY ANATOMY
Carter, Rita (2019). The Human Brain Book. New York, New York:
DK Publishing
Childre, Doc and Martin, Howard (2000). The Heartmath Solution.
New York, New York: HarperCollins Publishers
McCraty, Rollin (2015). Science of the Heart: Exploring the Role of
the Heart in Human Performance (Volume 2). Boulder Creek, California:
HeartMath Institute
Power, Katrina (2020) How to Hack Your Vagus Nerve. Independently
Published

Splittgerber, Ryan (2019). Snell’s Clinical Neuroanatomy: Eight
Edition. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: Wolters Kluwer
Wineski, Lawrenece E. (2019). Snell’s Clinical Anatomy by Regions:
Tenth Edition. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: Wolters Kluwer

YOGA AND TANTRA
Ashley-Farrand, Thomas (1999). Healing Mantras: Using Sound
Affirmations for Personal Power, Creativity, and Healing. New York, New
York: Ballantine Wellspring
Aun Weor, Samael (2012). Kundalini Yoga: Unlock the Divine
Spiritual Power Within You. Glorian Publishing
Avalon, Arthur (1974). The Serpent Power. New York, New York:
Dover Publications, Inc.
Bhajan, Yogi (2013). Kriya: Yoga Sets, Meditations & Classic Kriyas.
Santa Cruz, California: Kundalini Research Instititute
Buddhananda, Swami (2012). Moola Bandha: The Master Key.
Munger, Bihar, India: Yoga Publications Trust
Feuerstein, Georg (1998). Tantra: The Path of Ecstasy. Boulder,
Colorado: Shambhala Publications, Inc.
Frawley, Dr. David (2010). Mantra Yoga and Primal Sound: Secrets of
Seed (Bija) Mantras. Twin Lakes, Wisconsin: Lotus Press
Frawley, David (2004). Yoga and the Sacred Fire: Self-Realization and
Planetary Transformation. Twin Lakes, Wisconsin: Lotus Press
Hulse, David Allen (2004). The Eastern Mysteries: The Key of it All,
Book I. St. Paul, Minnesota: Llewellyn Publications
Japananda Das, Srila (2019). Yantra: Power and Magic. Independently
Published
Kaminoff, Leslie and Matthews, Amy (2012). Yoga Anatomy.
Champaign, Illinois: Human Kinetics
Maehle, Gregor (2012). Pranayama: The Breath of Yoga. Innaloo City,
Australia: Kaivalya Publications
Prasad, Rama (2015). Nature’s Finer Forces and Their Influence Upon
Human Life and Destiny. CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform
Saraswati, Swami Satyananda (2013). Asana Pranayama Mudra
Bandha. Munger, Bihar, India: Yogi Publications Trust

Saraswati, Swami Satyananda (2013). A Systematic Course in the
Ancient Tantric Techniques of Yoga and Kriya. Munger, Bihar, India: Yoga
Publications Trust
Saraswati, Swami Satyananda (2012). Hatha Yoga Pradipika. Munger,
Bihar, India: Yogi Publications Trust
Saraswati, Swami Satyananda (2007). Kundalini Tantra. Munger,
Bihar, India: Yoga Publications Trust
Saraswati, Swami Satyananda (2012). Meditations From the Tantras.
Munger, Bihar, India: Yoga Publications Trust
Saraswati, Swami Satyadharma (2019). Yoga Kundali Upanishad:
Theory and Practices for Awakening Kundalini. Independently Published,
United States
Satyasangananda, Swami (2013). Tattwa Shuddhi. Munger, Bihar,
India: Yogi Publications Trust
Swami, Om (2017). The Ancient Science of Mantras: Wisdom of the
Sages. Amazon.com: Black Lotus Publishing
Vivekananda, Swami (2019). Raja Yoga: Conquering the Internal
Nature. Kolkata, India: Advaita Ashrama
Weor, Samael Aun (2018). Sacred Rites for Rejuvenation: As Simple,
Powerful
Technique
for
Healing
and
Spiritual
Strength.
www.gnosticteachings.org: Glorian Publishing
Woodroffe, Sir John (2018). Introduction to Tantra Sastra. T. Nagar,
Madras, India: Ganesh & Company
Yogananda, Paramahamsa (2019). Autobiography of a Yogi. Los
Angeles, California: Self Realization Fellowship
Yogananda, Paramahamsa (2019). The Second Coming of Christ: The
Resurrection of the Christ Within You. Volumes I-II. Los Angeles,
California: Self Realization Fellowship

AYURVEDA
Lad, Vasant (2019). Ayurveda: The Science of Self-Healing. Twin
Lakes, Wisconsin: Lotus Press
Frawley, Dr. David, (2003). Ayurveda and Marma Therapy: Energy
Points in Yogic Healing. Co-Authors Dr. Subhash Ranade and Dr. Avinash
Lele. Twin Lakes, Wisconsin: Lotus Press

Frawley, Dr. David, and Lad, Vasant (2008). The Yoga of Herbs. Twin
Lakes, Wisconsin: Lotus Press
The Ayurvedic Institute. Food Guidelines for Basic Constitutional
Types (PDF)
Frawley, Dr. David (1999). Yoga & Ayurveda: Self-Healing and SelfRealization. Twin Lakes, Wisconsin: Lotus Press
Frawley, Dr. David and Summerfield Kozak, Sandra (2012). Yoga for
Your Type: An Ayurvedic Approach to Your Asana Practice. Twin Lakes,
Wisconsin: Lotus Press
Frawley, Dr. David (2013). Ayurvedic Healing: A Comprehensive
Guide. Twin Lakes, Wisconsin: Lotus Press
Frawley, Dr. David, and Ranada, Dr. Sabhash (2012). Ayurveda:
Nature’s Medicine. Twin Lakes, Wisconsin: Lotus Press

VEDIC ASTROLOGY
Frawley, Dr. David (2005). Ayurvedic Astrology: Self-Healing Through
the Stars. Twin Lakes, Wisconsin: Lotus Press
Frawley, Dr. David (2000). Astrology of the Seers. A Guide to
Vedic/Hindu Astrology. Twin Lakes, Wisconsin: Lotus Press
Sutton, Komilla (2014). The Nakshatras: The Stars Beyond the Zodiac.
Bournemouth, England: The Wessex Astrologer Ltd.
Kurczak, Ryan, and Fish, Richard (2012). The Art and Science of Vedic
Astrology. CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform

HAND MUDRAS
Menen, Rajendar (2013). The Healing Power of Mudras: The Yoga in
Your Hands. New Delhi, India: V&S Publishers
Saradananda, Swami (2015). Mudras for Modern Life: Boost Your
Health, Re-Energize Your Life, Enhance Your Yoga and Deepen Your
Meditation. London, Great Britain: Watkins
Hirschi, Gertrud (2016). Mudras: Yoga in Your Hands. Newburyport,
Massachusetts: Weiser Books
Le Page, Joseph and Lilian (2014). Mudras For Healing and
Transformation. Ft. Lauderdale, Florida: Integrative Yoga Therapy

Carroll, Cain and Revital (2013). Mudras of India: A Comprehensive
Guide to the Hand Gestures of Yoga and Indian Dance. Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania: Singing Dragon
Advait (2015). Mudras: 25 Ultimate Techniques for Self-Healing.
CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform

GEMSTONES AND TUNING FORKS
McGeough, Marion (2013). Crystal Healing & the Human Energy
Field. CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform
Lembo, Margaret Ann (2017). The Essential Guide to Crystals,
Minerals and Stones. Woodbury, Minnesota: Llewellyn Publications
Permutt, Philip (2016). The Crystal Healer: Crystal Prescriptions That
Will Change Your Life Forever. London, England: Cico Books
McKusick, Eileen Day (2014). Tuning the Human Biofield: Healing
with Vibrational Sound Therapy. Rochester, Vermont: Healing Arts Press
Hall, Judy (2003). The Crystal Bible: A Definitive Guide to Crystals.
Iola, Wisconsin: Krause Publications.
Hall, Judy (2009). The Crystal Bible 2. Iola, Wisconsin: Krause
Publications.
Beaulieu, John (2010). Human Tuning: Sound Healing With Tuning
Forks. High Falls, New York: BioSonic Enterprises

AROMATHERAPY
Lembo, Margaret Ann (2016). The Essential Guide to Aromatherapy
and Vibrational Healing. Woodbury, Minnesota: Llewellyn Worldwide
Cunningham, Scott (2020). Encyclopedia of Magical Herbs.
Woodbury, Minnesota: Llewellyn Worldwide
Kennedy, Anne (2018) Aromatherapy for Beginners: The Complete
Guide to Getting Started With Essential Oils. Berkeley, California: Althea
Press
Wormwood, Valerie Ann (2016). The Complete Book of Essential Oils
and Aromatherapy. Novato, California: New World Library
Davis, Patricia (2000). Subtle Aromatherapy. Essex, United Kingdom:
Saffron Walden

Covington, Candice (2017). Essential Oils in Spiritual Practice:
Working With the Chakras, Divine Archetypes, and the Five Great
Elements. Rochester, Vermont: Healing Arts Press

SACRED GEOMETRY
Melchizedek, Drunvalo (1990). The Ancient Secret of the Flower of
Life: Volume 1. Flagstaff, Arizona: Light Technology Publishing
Melchizedek, Drunvalo (2000). The Ancient Secret of the Flower of
Life: Volume 2. Flagstaff, Arizona: Light Technology Publishing

WESTERN MYSTERIES
Agrippa, Henry Cornelius (1992). Three Books of Occult Philosophy.
St. Paul, Minnesota: Llewellyn Publications
Anonymous (2005) The Emerald Tablet of Hermes. With Multiple
Translations. Whitefish, Montana: Kessinger Publishing
Copenhaver, Brian P. (2000) Hermetica: The Greek Corpus
Hermeticum and the Latin Asclepius in a New English Translation, with
Notes and Introduction. New York, New York: Cambridge University Press
Doreal, M. (Unknown). The Emerald Tablets of Thoth the Antlantean.
Nashville, Tennessee: Source Books
Everard, John (2019). The Divine Pymander. Whithorn, Scotland:
Anodos Books
Mumford, John Dr. (1997). Magical Tattwas: A Complete System for
Self-Development. St. Paul, Minnesota: Llewellyn Publications
Paar, Neven (2019). The Magus: Kundalini and the Golden Dawn.
Toronto, Ontario: Winged Shoes Publishing
Regardie, Israel (1971). The Golden Dawn. St. Paul, Minnesota:
Llewellyn Publications
Three Initiates (1940). The Kybalion: Hermetic Philosophy. Chicago,
Illinois: Yogi Publication Society
Unknown (2003). Esoteric Order of the Golden Dawn: Theoricus 2=9
Grade Manual. Added to by G.H. Frater P.D.R. Los Angeles, California:
H.O.M.S.I.

Woolfolk, Joanna Martine (2006). The Only Astrology Book You’ll
Ever Need. Lanham, Maryland: Taylor Trade Publishing

RELIGIOUS TEXTS
Ashlag, Rav Yehuda (2007). The Zohar. Commentary by Rav Michael
Laitman PhD. Toronto, Ontario: Laitman Kabbalah Publishers
EasWaran Aknath (2007). The Dhammapada. Tomales, California:
Nilgiri Press
EasWaran Aknath (2007). The Upanishads. Tomales, California:
Nilgiri Press
Griffith, Ralph T.H. and Keith, Arthur Berriedale (2017). The Vedas:
The Samhitas of the Rig, Yajur (White and Black), Sama, and Atharva
Vedas. CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform
Moses (1967). The Torah: The Five Books of Moses (Otherwise known
as the Old Testament). Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: The Jewish Publication
Society of America
Muhammad (2006). The Koran. Translated with Notes by N.J.
Dawood. London, England: Penguin Books
Saraswati, Swami Satyananda (1997). Bhagavad Gita. Napa,
California: Devi Mandir Publications and Motilal Banarsidass Publishers
Private Limited
Stiles, Mukunda (2002). Yoga Sutras of Patanjali. San Francisco,
California : Weiser Books
Various (2002). The Holy Bible: King James Version (Includes the Old
and the New Testament). Grand Rapids, Michigan: Zondervan

ONLINE RESOURCES
3 Sanskrit Mantras to Boost Your Meditation Practice - Reference
page for Mantras
(www.yogiapproved.com/om/3-sanskrit-mantras-boost-meditationpractice/) 7 Mantras to Create the Life You Want - Reference page for
Mantras
(www.chopra.com/articles/7-mantras-for-creating-the-life-you-want)
7Pranayama-Breath of Life - Reference page for Yogic philosophy and

practices
(www.7pranayama.com)
71 Yoga Mudras: Get Surprising Benefits in 29 Days, Supported by
Science – Reference
page for Yoga Mudras (www.fitsri.com/yoga-mudras)
9 Powerful Mantras in Sanskrit and Gurmukhi - Reference page for
Mantras
(www.chopra.com/articles/9-powerful-mantras-in-sanskrit-andgurmukhi) Anatomy of the Aura - Reference page for the Aura and its parts
(www.auraology.net/anatomy-of-the-aura)
An Intro to the Vagus Nerve & the Connection to Kundalini Reference page for the connection between the Vagus Nerve and Kundalini
(www.basmati.com/2017/05/02/intro-vagus-nerve-connection-kundalini)
Astrological Aromatherapy-Blends for Your Star Sign - Reference page
for Aromatherapy (www.baseformula.com/blog/astrological-aromatherapy)
Astrology and Ayurveda - Reference page for Astrology and Ayurveda
(www.astrobix.com/astrosight/208-astrology-and-ayurveda.html)
Astrology and the Chakras: Two Sides of the Same Coin - Reference page
for
Astrology
and
the
Chakras
(www.innerself.com/content/personal/intuition-awareness/astrology/4410astrology-a-the-chakras.html)
Aura Colour Guide - Reference page for the Aura and its parts
(www.auraaura.co/aura-colors)
AuraFit: Mobile Biofeedback System - Official page for the Aura
reading
technology
invented
by
Bettina
Bernoth
Ph.D.
(www.aurafitsystem.org/)
Aura Shapes - Reference page for energy problems in the Aura
(www.the-auras-expert.com/aura-shapes.html)
Ayurveda and Asana: Yoga Poses for Your Health - Reference page for
Yoga for the Doshas (www.yogajournal.com/lifestyle/health/ayurveda-andasana/)
Best Ayurveda: Body constitution Type Chart - Reference page for
Ayurveda
(www.bestayurveda.ca/pages/body-constitution-type-chart) Bija Mantra
- Reference page for Bija Mantras
(www.hinduscriptures.com/vedic-culture/bija-mantra/24330/) Charms
of Light: Energy, Healing, and Love - Reference page for Crystals

(www.charmsoflight.com/gemstone-crystal-healing-properties)
Descartes and the Pineal Gland - Reference page for the Pineal Gland and
its historical research (https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/pineal-gland/)
Designing a Yoga Routine for Your Dosha - Reference page for Yoga
and the Doshas
(www.chopra.com/articles/designing-a-yoga-routine-for-your-dosha)
Encyclopedia Britannica - Reference page for all branches of knowledge
(www.britannica.com)
Esoteric Other Worlds: Tattva Vision - Reference page for working
with Tattvas
(www.esotericotherworlds.blogspot.com/2013/06/tattva-vision.html)
Ethan Lazzerini-Crystal Healing Blog, Guides & Tips - Reference page for
Crystals
(www.ethanlazzerini.com/crystal-shapes-meanings/)
Freedom Vidya-Meditation on the Chakra Petal Bijas - Reference page
for Chakra Petal Bijas (www.shrifreedom.org/yoga/chakra-petal-sounds/)
Greek Medicine.Net - Reference page for the brain and nervous system
(www.greekmedicine.net/physiology/Brain_and_Nervous_System.html)
Hatha or Vinyasa Yoga: Which One is Right for You? - Reference page
for Hatha and Vinyasa Yogas (www.healthline.com/health/exercisefitness/hatha-vs-vinyasa)
How to Balance Your Vital Energy & Chakras With Essential Oils Reference
page
for
Chakras
and
Essential
Oils
(www.motherhoodcommunity.com/chakra-essential-oils/)
How Does Exercise Affect the Brain? - Reference page for the effects
of exercise on your brain (www.dana.org/article/how-does-exercise-affectthe-brain/)
Institute for Consciousness Research - Reference page for Kundalini
research and human energy potential (www.icrcanada.org)
Intro to Ayurveda: Understanding the Three Doshas - Reference page
for Ayurveda
(www.yogajournal.com/lifestyle/health/ayurveda/intro-ayurveda/) Male
and Female Chakras - Reference page for gender in Chakras
(www.rootshunt.com/maleandfemalechakras.htm)
Natural Chakra Healing-Seed Mantras for Each Chakra - Reference
page for Bija Mantras (www.naturalchakrahealing.com/chakra-seedmantras.html)

Neural Correlates of Personalized Spiritual Experiences - Reference
page for the connection between brain anatomy and Spiritual experiences
(www.academic.oup.com/cercor/article/29/6/2331/5017785)
Relationship Between Chakras in Human Body, Planets & Medical
Astrology - Reference page for the association between Chakras, Planets,
and Endocrine Glands
(www.anilsripathi.wordpress.com/relationship-between-human-bodychakras-planetsmedical-astrology/) Rocks with Sass - Reference page for
Crystals and their shapes
(www.rockswithsass.com/blog/2020/4/13/crystal-shapes-their-meaningand-uses) Science of the Heart - Reference page for the HeartMath Institute
and
their
research
(www.heartmath.org/research/science-of-theheart/energetic-communication)
Scrying in the Spirit Vision. Part I: Tattva Vision - Reference page for
working with Tattvas (www.fraterooe.livejournal.com/4366.html)
Six Typical Energy Problems and How to Heal Them - Reference page
for energy problems in the Aura (www.nataliemarquis.com/six-typicalenergy-problems-and-how-to-heal-them/)
SlimYogi: An Illustrated Step-By-Step Guide to 90 Slimming Yoga
Postures
Reference
PDF
for
practicing
Yoga
(www.mymission.lamission.edu/userdata/ruyssc/docs/Stretch-AnUllustrated-Step-By-Step-Guide-To-Yoga-Postures.pdf)
Spiritual Ayurveda: Our Five Subtle Bodies and Three Subtle Essences
- Reference page for Ayurveda (www.maharishi.co.uk/blog/spiritualayurveda-our-five-subtle-bodies-and-three-subtle-essences/)
Tattwas and Antahkarana Instructions - Reference page for the Tattvas
(www.manas-vidya.blogspot.com/2011/09/practice-antahkarana.html)
The Chakras and Gender-Masculine/Feminine Energies - Reference page
for gender in Chakras (www.naturalchakrahealing.com/chakras-and-gendermasculine-feminine-energy.html)
The Crystal Compendium EBook - Reference page for Crystals
(www.crystalgemstones.net/crystalcompendium.php)
The Disengagement of the Reticular Activating System (RAS) Reference page for the Reticular Activating System’s role in Spiritual
awakening (www.spiritrisingyoga.org/kundalini-info/the-disengagement-ofthe-reticular-activating-system)

The Kundalini Consortium (www.kundaliniconsortium.org)- Reference
page for Kundalini research and human energy potential
Vedic Astrology & the Chakras - Reference page for the association
between
Chakras
and
Planets
(www.alchemicalbody.wordpress.com/2013/06/01/vedic-astrology-thechakras/)
Vibrational Energy Medicine - Reference page for the Chakras
(www.energyandvibration.com/chakras.htm)
What are Bija Mantras - Reference page for Bija Mantras
(www.satyaloka.net/what-are-bija-mantras/)
What are the Ayurveda Doshas? Vata, Kapha, and Pitta Explained Reference page for Ayurveda (www.healthline.com/nutrition/vata-doshapitta-dosha-kapha-dosha)
What are the Benefits of Yoga & Meditation - Reference page for Yoga
and meditation
(www.poweryoga.com/blog/benefits-and-differences-yoga-meditation/)
What is Aromatherapy? - Reference page for Aromatherapy
(www.webmd.com/balance/stress-management/aromatherapy-overview)
What is Yoga Meditation? - Reference page for meditation
(www.sivanandayogafarm.org/what-is-yoga-meditation/)
What to Know About Your Brain’s Frontal Lobe - Reference page for
brain anatomy (www.healthline.com/health/frontal-lobe)
Yoga For Balancing the Doshas - Reference page for Yoga for the
Doshas
(www.ekhartyoga.com/articles/wellbeing/yoga-for-balancing-thedoshas) Yoga Journal: A Beginner’s Guide to Meditation - Reference page
for meditation
(www.yogajournal.com/meditation/how-to-meditate/let-s-meditate/)
Yogapedia - Reference page for Yogic philosophy and practices
(www.yogapedia.com)
Yogapoint-India - Reference page for Yogic philosophy and practices
(www.yogapoint.com/index.htm)
Wikipedia-The Free Encyclopedia - Reference page for all branches of
knowledge (www.wikipedia.org)

IMAGES RESOURCES

Figure 2: The Three Nadis Post-Kundalini Awakening - Yogi
Mahajan's The Ascent. (Page 6.)
Figure 5: The Complete Kundalini Circuit - Swami Satyananda
Saraswati's Kundalini Tantra. (Page 288.)
Figure 6: The Brain Filled with Light - Christopher & Dana Reeve
Foundation's How the Spinal Cord Works (Online Page.)
Figure 10: The Pentagram – Henry Cornelius Agrippa's Three Books
of Occult Philosophy. (Page 180.)
Figure 15: Ida and Pingala Nadis and Ajna Chakra - Genevieve Lewis
Paulson's Kundalini and the Chakras. (Page 184.)
Figure 16: The Electromagnetic Field of the Earth – Peter Reid's The
Earth's Magnetic Field (Online Image.)
Figure 20: Aura Anatomy – Bettina Bernoth's AuraFit Training
Manuscript (Page 11.)
Figure 22: The Kundalini Toroidal Field – Bruce Burger's Esoteric
Anatomy: The Body as Consciousness. (Page 54.)
Figure 23: The Seven Chakras and Nerve Plexuses – Anodea Judith's
Wheels of Life: A User’s Guide to the Chakra System. (Page 12.)
Figure 24: Brain Expansion and Chakric Correspondences - Swami
Satyananda Saraswati's Kundalini Tantra. (Page 35.)
Figure 26: The Minor Head Chakras (Crown) - Genevieve Lewis
Paulson's Kundalini and the Chakras. (Page 150.)
Figure 31: Location of the Psychic Eyes - Genevieve Lewis Paulson's
Kundalini and the Chakras. (Page 140.)
Figure 37: Orientation of Tetrahedrons in Males and Females Drunvalo Melchizedek's The Ancient Secret of the Flower of Life: Volume 1.
(Page 49.)
Figure 42: The Limbic System – Paul Wissmann's Basic Ganglia and
Limbic System (Online Image.)
Figure 51: Conus Medullaris and Filum Terminale – Cyndi Dale's The
Complete Book of Chakras: Your Definitive Source of Energy Center
Knowledge for Health, Happiness, and Spiritual Evolution. (Page 78.)
Figure 57: The Electromagnetic Field of the Heart - Doc Childre and
Howard Martin's The Heartmath Solution. (Page 34.)
Figure 59: The Heart Chakra Center– Anodea Judith's Wheels of Life:
A User’s Guide to the Chakra System. (Page 197.)

Figure 123: Mula Bandha Contraction Point - Swami Satyananda
Saraswati's Asana Pranayama Mudra Bandha. (Page 476.)
Figure 128: Vajroli, Sahajoli, and Ashwini Mudras Contraction Points
- Swami Buddhananda's Moola Bandha: The Master Key. (Page 81.)
Figure 134: Sushumna Nadi Layers and the Cosmic Egg - Cyndi
Dale's The Subtle Body: An Encyclopedia of Your Energetic Anatomy. (Page
276.)
Figure 147: The Three Doshas and Body Zones - Vasant Lad's
Ayurveda: The Science of Self-Healing. (Page 27.)
Figure 151: Lucid Dream Projection - Veenu Sandal's Online Article
Spirit ‘Walk-Ins’ and Matters of the Soul (Online Article.)
Figure 153: Sahasrara Chakra Lotus - Swami Satyananda Saraswati's
Kundalini Tantra. (Page 307.)
Figure 154: Kundalini Flow through Sushumna - Genevieve Lewis
Paulson's Kundalini and the Chakras. (Page 16.)

